> Bubblesort is a popular, but inefficient, sorting algorithm. It works by repeatedly swapping adjacent elements that are out of order.
>
> ```cpp
> BUBBLESORT(A)
>     for i = 1 to A.length - 1
>         for j = A.length downto i + 1
>             if A[j] < A[j - 1]
>                 exchange A[j] with A[j - 1]
> ```
>
> **a.** Let $A'$ denote the output of $\text{BUBBLESORT}(A)$ To prove that $\text{BUBBLESORT}$ is correct, we need to prove that it terminates and that
>
> $$A'[1] \le A'[2] \le \cdots \le A'[n], \tag{2.3}$$
>
> where $n = A.length$. In order to show that BUBBLESORT actually sorts, what else do we need to prove?
>
> The next two parts will prove inequality $\text{(2.3)}$.
>
> **b.** State precisely a loop invariant for the **for** loop in lines 2–4, and prove that this loop invariant holds. Your proof should use the structure of the loop invariant proof presented in this chapter.
>
> **c.** Using the termination condition of the loop invariant proved in part (b), state a loop invariant for the **for** loop in lines 1–4 that will allow you to prove inequality $\text{(2.3)}$. Your proof should use the structure of the loop invariant proof presented in this chapter.
>
> **d.** What is the worst-case running time of bubblesort? How does it compare to the running time of insertion sort?

**a.** We need to show that the elements of $A'$ form a permutation of the elements of $A$.

**b.** **Loop invariant:** At the start of each iteration of the **for** loop of lines 2–4, $A[j] = \min\\{A[k]: j \le k \le n\\}$ and the subarray $A[j..n]$ is a permutation of the values that were in $A[j..n]$ at the time that the loop started.

**Initialization:** Initially, $j = n$, and the subarray $A[j..n]$ consists of single element $A[n]$. The loop invariant trivially holds.

**Maintenance:** Consider an iteration for a given value of $j$. By the loop invariant, $A[j]$ is the smallest value in $A[j..n]$. Lines 3–4 exchange $A[j]$ and $A[j - 1]$ if $A[j]$ is less than $A[j - 1]$, and so $A[j - 1]$ will be the smallest value in $A[j - 1..n]$ afterward. Since the only change to the subarray $A[j - 1..n]$ is this possible exchange, and the subarray $A[j..n]$ is a permutation of the values that were in $A[j..n]$ at the time that the loop started, we see that $A[j - 1..n]$ is a permutation of the values that were in $A[j - 1..n]$ at the time that the loop started. Decrementing $j$ for the next iteration maintains the invariant.

**Termination:** The loop terminates when $j$ reaches $i$. By the statement of the loop invariant, $A[i] = \min\\{A[k]: i \le k \le n\\}$ and $A[i..n]$ is a permutation of the values that were in $A[i..n]$ at the time that the loop started.

**c.** **Loop invariant:** At the start of each iteration of the **for** loop of lines 1–4, the subarray $A[1..i - 1]$ consists of the $i - 1$ smallest values originally in $A[1..n]$, in sorted order, and $A[i..n]$ consists of the $n - i + 1$ remaining values originally in $A[1..n]$.

**Initialization:** Before the first iteration of the loop, $i = 1$. The subarray $A[1..i - 1]$ is empty, and so the loop invariant vacuously holds.

**Maintenance:** Consider an iteration for a given value of $i$. By the loop invariant, $A[1..i - 1]$ consists of the $i$ smallest values in $A[1..n]$, in sorted order. Part (b) showed that after executing the **for** loop of lines 2–4, $A[i]$ is the smallest value in $A[i..n]$, and so $A[1..i]$ is now the $i$ smallest values originally in $A[1..n]$, in sorted order. Moreover, since the **for** loop of lines 2–4 permutes $A[i..n]$, the subarray $A[i + 1..n]$ consists of the $n - i$ remaining values originally in $A[1..n]$.

**Termination:** The **for** loop of lines 1–4 terminates when $i = n$, so that $i - 1 = n - 1$. By the statement of the loop invariant, $A[1..i - 1]$ is the subarray $A[1..n - 1]$, and it consists of the $n - 1$ smallest values originally in $A[1..n]$, in sorted order. The remaining element must be the largest value in $A[1..n]$, and it is in $A[n]$. Therefore, the entire array $A[1..n]$ is sorted.

**_Note:_** Tn the second edition, the **for** loop of lines 1–4 had an upper bound of $A.length$. The last iteration of the outer **for** loop would then result in no iterations of the inner **for** loop of lines 1–4, but the termination argument would simplify: $A[1..i - 1]$ would be the entire array $A[1..n]$, which, by the loop invariant, is sorted.

**d.** The running time depends on the number of iterations of the **for** loop of lines 2–4. For a given value of $i$, this loop makes $n - i$ iterations, and $i$ takes on the values $1, 2, \ldots, n - 1$. The total number of iterations, therefore, is

$$
\begin{aligned}
\sum_{i = 1}^{n - 1} (n - i)
    & = \sum_{i = 1}^{n - 1} n - \sum_{i = 1}^{n - 1} i \\\\
    & = n(n - 1) - \frac{n(n - 1)}{2} \\\\
    & = \frac{n(n - 1)}{2} \\\\
    & = \frac{n^2}{2} - \frac{n}{2}.
\end{aligned}
$$

Thus, the running time of bubblesort is $\Theta(n^2)$ in all cases. The worst-case running time is the same as that of insertion sort.
