> Let $A[1..n]$ be an array of $n$ distinct numbers. If $i < j$ and $A[i] > A[j]$, then the pair $(i, j)$ is called an **_inversion_** of $A$.
>
> **a.** List the five inversions in the array $\langle 2, 3, 8, 6, 1 \rangle$.
>
> **b.** What array with elements from the set $\\{1, 2, \ldots, n\\}$ has the most inversions? How many does it have?
>
> **c.** What is the relationship between the running time of insertion sort and the number of inversions in the input array? Justify your answer.
>
> **d.** Give an algorithm that determines the number of inversions in any permutation of $n$ elements in $\Theta(n\lg n)$ worst-case time. ($\textit{Hint:}$ Modify merge sort).

**a.** $(1, 5)$, $(2, 5)$, $(3, 4)$, $(3, 5)$, $(4, 5)$.

**b.** The array $\langle n, n - 1, \dots, 1 \rangle$ has the most inversions $(n - 1) + (n - 2) + \cdots + 1 = n(n - 1) / 2$.

**c.** The running time of insertion sort is a constant times the number of inversions. Let $I(i)$ denote the number of $j < i$ such that $A[j] > A[i]$. Then $\sum_{i = 1}^n I(i)$ equals the number of inversions in $A$.

Now consider the **while** loop on lines 5-7 of the insertion sort algorithm. The loop will execute once for each element of $A$ which has index less than $j$ is larger than $A[j]$. Thus,
it will execute $I(j)$ times. We reach this **while** loop once for each iteration
of the **for** loop, so the number of constant time steps of insertion sort is $\sum_{j = 1}^n I(j)$ which is exactly the inversion number of $A$.

**d.** We'll call our algorithm $\text{COUNT-INVERSIONS}$ for modified merge sort. In addition to sorting $A$, it will also keep track of the number of inversions.

$\text{COUNT-INVERSIONS}(A, p, r)$ sorts $A[p..r]$ and returns the number of inversions in the elements of $A[p..r]$, so $left$ and $right$ track the number of inversions of the form $(i, j)$ where $i$ and $j$ are both in the same half of $A$.

$\text{MERGE-INVERSIONS}(A, p, q, r)$ returns the number of inversions of the form $(i, j)$ where $i$ is in the first half of the array and $j$ is in the second half. Summing these up gives the total number of inversions in $A$. The runtime of the modified algorithm is $\Theta(n\lg n)$, which is same as merge sort since we only add an additional constant-time operation to some of the iterations in some of the loops.

```cpp
COUNT-INVERSIONS(A, p, r)
    if p < r
        q = floor((p + r) / 2)
        left = COUNT-INVERSIONS(A, p, q)
        right = COUNT-INVERSIONS(A, q + 1, r)
        inversions = MERGE-INVERSIONS(A, p, q, r) + left + right
        return inversions
```

```cpp
MERGE-INVERSIONS(A, p, q, r)
    n1 = q - p + 1
    n2 = r - q
    let L[1..n1 + 1] and R[1..n2 + 1] be new arrays
    for i = 1 to n1
        L[i] = A[p + i - 1]
    for j = 1 to n2
        R[j] = A[q + j]
    L[n1 + 1] = ∞
    R[n2 + 1] = ∞
    i = 1
    j = 1
    inversions = 0
    for k = p to r
        if L[i] <= R[j]
            A[k] = L[i]
            i = i + 1
        else
            inversions = inversions + n1 - i + 1
            A[k] = R[j]
            j = j + 1
    return inversions
```
