---
title: "16.4 Matroids and greedy methods"
---

## 16.4-1

> Show that $(S, I\_k)$ is a matroid, where $S$ is any finite set and $I\_k$ is the set of all subsets of $S$ of size at most $k$, where $k \le |S|$.

The first condition that $S$ is a finite set is a given. To prove the second condition we assume that $k \ge 0$, this gets us that $\mathcal I\_k$ is nonempty. Also, to prove the hereditary property, suppose $A \in \mathcal I\_k$ this means that $|A| \le k$.
Then, if $B \subseteq A$, this means that $|B| \le |A| \le k$, so $B \in \mathcal I\_k$. Lastly, we prove the exchange property by letting $A, B \in \mathcal I\_k$ be such that $|A| < |B|$. Then, we can pick any element $x \in B \backslash A$, then,

<div>
$$
|A \cup {x}| = |A| + 1 \le |B| \le k,
$$
</div>

so, we can extend $A$ to $A \cup \\{x\\} \in \mathcal I\_k$.

## 16.4-2 $\star$

> Given an $m \times n$ matrix $T$ over some field (such as the reals), show that $(S, \mathcal I)$ is a matroid, where $S$ is the set of columns of $T$ and $A \in \mathcal I$ if and only if the columns in $A$ are linearly independent.

We need to show three things to prove that $(S, \mathcal I)$ is a matroid:

1. $S$ is finite. That's because $S$ is the set of $m$ columns of matrix $T$.
2. $\mathcal I$ is hereditary. That's because if $B \in \mathcal I$, then the colums in $B$ are linearly independent. If $A \subseteq B$, then the columns of $A$ must also be linearly independent, and so $A \in I$.
3. $(S, \mathcal I)$ satisfies the exchange property. To see why, let us suppose that $A, B \in \mathcal I$ and $|A| < |B|$.
	We will use the following properties of matrices:
	- The rank of a matrix is the number of columns in a maximal set of linearly independent columns. The rank is also equal to the dimension of the column space of the matrix.
	- If the column space of matrix $B$ is a subspace of the column space of matrix $A$, then $\text{rank}(B) \le \text{rank}(A)$.

	Because the columns in $A$ are linearly independent, if we take just these columns as a matrix $A$, we have that $\text{rank}(A) = |A|$. Similarly, if we take the columns of $B$ as a matrix $B$, we have $\text{rank}(B) = |B|$. Since $|A| < |B|$, we have $\text{rank}(A) < \text{rank}(B)$.

    We shall show that there is some column $b \in B$ that is not a linear combination of the columns in $A$, and so $A \cup \\{b\\}$ is linearly independent. The proof proceeds by contradiction. Assume that each column in $B$ is a linear combination of the columns of $A$. That means that any vector that is a linear combination of the columns of $B$ is also a linear combination of the columns of $A$, and so, treating the columns of $A$ and $B$ as matrices, the column space of $B$ is a subspace of the column space of $A$. By the second property above, we have $\text{rank}(B) \le \text{rank}(A)$. But we have already shown that $\text{rank}(A) < \text{rank}(B)$ a contradiction. Therefore, some column in $B$ is not a linear combination of the columns of $A$, and $(S, \mathcal I)$ satisfies the exchange property.

## 16.4-3 $\star$

> Show that if $(S, \mathcal I)$ is a matroid, then $(S, \mathcal I^\prime)$ is a matroid, where
>
> $I^\prime = \\{A^\prime: S - A^\prime$ contains some maximal $A \in \mathcal I\\}$.
>
> That is, the maximal independent sets of $(S, \mathcal I^\prime)$ are just the complements of the maximal independent sets of $(S, \mathcal I)$.

_[This exercise defines what is commonly known as the dual of a matroid, and it asks to prove that the dual of a matroid is itself a matroid. The literature contains simpler proofs of this fact, but they depend on other (equivalent) definitions of a matroid. The proof given here is more complicated, but it relies only on the definition given in the text.]_

We need to show three things to prove that $(S, \mathcal I^\prime)$ is a matroid:

1. $S$ is finite. We are given that.
2. $\mathcal I^\prime$ is hereditary. Suppose that $B^\prime \in \mathcal I^\prime$ and $A^\prime \subseteq B^\prime$ . Since $B^\prime \in \mathcal I^\prime$, there is some maximal set $B \in \mathcal I$ such that $B \subseteq S - B^\prime$ . But $A^\prime \subseteq B^\prime$ implies that $S - B^\prime \subseteq S - A^\prime$, and so $B \subseteq S - B^\prime \subseteq S - A^\prime$. Thus, there exists a maximal set $B \in \mathcal I$ such that $B \subseteq S - A^\prime$, proving that $A^\prime \in \mathcal I^\prime$.
3. $(S, \mathcal I^\prime)$ satisfies the exchange property. We start with two preliminary facts about sets. The proofs of these facts are omitted.
	- **Fact 1:** $|X - Y| = |X| - |X \cap Y|$.
	- **Fact 2:** Let $S$ be the universe of elements. If $X - Y \subseteq Z$ and $Z \subseteq S - Y$, then $|X \cap Z| = |X| - |X \cap Y|$.

To show that $(S, \mathcal I^\prime)$ satisfies the exchange property, let us assume that $A^\prime \in \mathcal I^\prime, B^\prime \in \mathcal I^\prime$, and that $|A^\prime| < |B^\prime|$. We need to show that there exists some $x \in B^\prime - A^\prime$ such that $A^\prime \cup \\{x\\} \in \mathcal I^\prime$. Because $A^\prime \in \mathcal I^\prime$ and $B^\prime \in \mathcal I^\prime$, there are maximal sets $A \subseteq S - A^\prime$ and $B \subseteq S - B^\prime$ such that $A \in \mathcal I$ and $B \in \mathcal I$.

Define the set $X = B^\prime - A^\prime - A$, so that $X$ consists of elements in $B^\prime$ but not in $A^\prime$ or $A$.

If $X$ is nonempty, then let $x$ be any element of $X$. By how we defined set $X$, we know that $x \in B^\prime$ and $x \notin A^\prime$, so that $x \in B^\prime - A^\prime$. Since $x \notin A$, we also have that $A \subseteq S - A^\prime - \\{x\\} = S - (A^\prime \cup \\{x\\})$, and so $A^\prime \cup \\{x\\} \in \mathcal I^\prime$.

If $X$ is empty, the situation is more complicated. Because$|A^\prime| < |B^\prime|$, we have that $B^\prime - A^\prime \ne \emptyset$, and so $X$ being empty means that $B^\prime - A^\prime \subseteq A$.

__*Claim*__

There is an element $y \in B - A^\prime$ such that $(A - B^\prime) \cup \\{y\\} \in \mathcal I$.

__*Proof*__

First, observe that because $A - B^\prime \subseteq A$ and $A \in \mathcal I$, we have that $A - B^\prime \in \mathcal I$. Similarly, $B - A^\prime \subseteq B$ and $B \in \mathcal I$, and so $B - A^\prime \in \mathcal I$. If we show that $|A - B^\prime| < |B - A^\prime|$, the assumption that $(S, \mathcal I)$ is a matroid proves the existence of $y$.

Because $B^\prime - A^\prime \subseteq A$ and $A \subseteq S - A^\prime$, we can apply Fact 2 to conclude that $|B^\prime \cap A| = |B^\prime| - |B^\prime \cap A^\prime|$. We claim that $|B \cap A^\prime| \le |A^\prime - B^\prime|$. To see why, observe that $A^\prime - B^\prime = A^\prime \cap (S - B^\prime)$ and $B \subseteq S - B^\prime$, and so $B \cap A^\prime \subseteq (S - B^\prime) \cap A^\prime = A^\prime \cap (S - B^\prime) = A^\prime - B^\prime$. Applying Fact 1, we see that $|A^\prime - B^\prime| = |A^\prime| - |A^\prime \cap B^\prime| = |A^\prime| - |B^\prime \cap A^\prime|$, and hence $|B \cap A^\prime| \le |A^\prime| - |B^\prime \cap A^\prime|$.  
Now, we have

<div>
$$
\begin{aligned}
    		  |A'| & < |B'| 		       & \text{(by assumption)} \\
|A'| - |B'\cap A'| & < |B'| - |B' \cap A'| & \text{(subtracting same quantity)} \\
	   |B \cap A'| & < |B'| - |B' \cap A'| & (|B \cap A'| \le |A'| - |B' \cap A'|) \\
       |B \cap A'| & < |B' \cap A| 		   & (|B' \cap A| = |B'| - |B' \cap A'|) \\
 |B| - |B \cap A'| & > |A| - |B' \cap A|   & (|A| = |B|) \\
          |B - A'| & > |A - B'| 		   & \text{(Fact 1)} \\
\end{aligned}
$$
</div>

Now we know there is an element $y \in B - A^\prime$ such that $(A - B^\prime) \cup \\{y\\} \in \mathcal I$. Moreover, we claim that $y \notin A$. To see why, we know that by the exchange property, $y \notin A - B^\prime$. In order for $y$ to be in $A$, it would have to be in $A \cap B^\prime$. But $y \in B$, which means that $y \notin B^\prime$, and hence $y \notin A \cap B^\prime$. Therefore $y \notin A$.

Applying the exchange property, we add elements in $B - A^\prime$ to $A - B^\prime$, maintaining that the set we get, say $C$, is in $\mathcal I$. Then we keep applying the exchange property, adding a new element in $A - C$ to $C$, maintaining that $C$ is in $\mathcal I$, until $|C| = |A|$. Once $|C| = |A|$, there must exist some element $x \in A$ that we have not added into $C$. We know that such an element exists because the element $y$ that we first added into $C$ was not in $A$, and so some element $x$ in $A$ must be left over. Also, we must have $x \in B^\prime$ because all the elements in $A - B^\prime$ are initially in $C$. Therefore, we have $x \in B^\prime - A^\prime$.

The set $C$ so constructed is maximal, because it has the same cardinality as $A$, which is maximal, and $C \in \mathcal I$. All the elements but one in $C$ are also in $A$; the one exceptions is in $B - A^\prime$, and so $C$ contains no elements in $A^\prime$. Because we never added $x$ to $C$, we have that $C \subseteq S - A^\prime - \\{x\\} = S - (A^\prime \cup \\{x\\})$. Therefore, $A^\prime \cup \\{x\\} \in \mathcal I^\prime$, as we needed to show.

## 16.4-4 $\star$

> Let $S$ be a finite set and let $S\_1, S\_2, \ldots, S\_k$ be a partition of $S$ into nonempty disjoint subsets. Define the structure $(S, I)$ by the condition that $\mathcal I = \\{A: \mid A \cap S\_i \mid \le 1$ for $i = 1, 2, \ldots, k\\}$. Show that $(S, \mathcal I)$ is a matroid. That is, the set of all sets $A$ that contain at most one member of each subset in the partition determines the independent sets of a matroid.

Suppose $X \subset Y$ and $Y \in \mathcal I$. Then $(X \cap S\_i) \subset (Y \cap S\_i)$ for all $i$, so

<div>
$$
|X \cap S_i| \le |Y \cap S_i| \le 1
$$
</div>

for all $1 \le i \le k$. Therefore $\mathcal M$ is closed under inclusion.

Now Let $A, B \in \mathcal I$ with $|A| = |B| + 1$. Then there must exist some $j$ such that $|A \cap S\_j| = 1$ but $|B \cap S\_j| = 0$. Let $a = A \cap S\_j$. Then $a \ne B$ and $|(B \cup \\{a\\}) \cap S\_j| = 1$. Since

<div>
$$
|(B \cup \{a\}) \cap S_i| = |B \cap S_i|
$$
</div>

for all $i \ne j$, we must have $B \cup \\{a\\} \in \mathcal I$. Therefore $\mathcal M$ is a matroid.

## 16.4-5

> Show how to transform the weight function of a weighted matroid problem, where the desired optimal solution is a _minimum-weight_ maximal independent subset, to make it a standard weighted-matroid problem. Argue carefully that your transformation is correct.

Suppose that $W$ is the largest weight that any one element takes. Then, define the new weight function $w\_2(x) = 1 + W - w(x)$. This then assigns a strictly positive weight, and we will show that any independent set that that has maximum weight with respect to $w\_2$ will have minimum weight with respect to $w$.

Recall Theorem 16.6 since we will be using it, suppose that for our matriod, all maximal independent sets have size $S$. Then, suppose $M\_1$ and $M\_2$ are maximal independent sets so that $M\_1$ is maximal with respect to $w\_2$ and $M\_2$ is minimal with respect to $w$. Then, we need to show that $w(M\_1) = w(M\_2)$. Suppose not to achieve a contradiction, then, by minimality of $M\_2$, $w(M\_1) > w(M\_2)$.

Rewriting both sides in terms of $w\_2$, we have

<div>
$$
w_2(M_2) - (1 + W)S > w_2(M_1) - (1 + W)S,
$$
</div>

so,

<div>
$$
w_2(M_2) > w_2(M_1).
$$
</div>

This however contradicts maximality of $M\_1$ with respect to $w\_2$. So, we must have that $w(M\_1) = w(M\_2)$. So, a maximal independent set that has the largest weight with respect to $w\_2$ also has the smallest weight with respect to $w$.