## 22.5-1

> How can the number of strongly connected components of a graph change if a new edge is added?

It can either stay the same or decrease. To see that it is possible to stay the same, just suppose you add some edge to a cycle. To see that it is possible to decrease, suppose that your original graph is on three vertices, and is just a path passing through all of them, and the edge added completes this path to a cycle. To see that it cannot increase, notice that adding an edge cannot remove any path that existed before. 

So, if $u$ and $v$ are in the same connected component in the original graph, then there are a path from one to the other, in both directions. Adding an edge wont disturb these two paths, so we know that $u$ and $v$ will still be in the same $\text{SCC}$ in the graph after adding the edge. Since no components can be split apart, this means that the number of them cannot increase since they form a partition of the set of vertices.

## 22.5-2

> Show how the procedure $\text{STRONGLY-CONNECTED-COMPONENTS}$ works on the graph of Figure 22.6. Specifically, show the finishing times computed in line 1 and the forest produced in line 3. Assume that the loop of lines 5–7 of $\text{DFS}$ considers vertices in alphabetical order and that the adjacency lists are in alphabetical order.

The finishing times of each vertex were computed in exercise 22.3-2. The forest consists of 5 trees, each of which is a chain. We'll list the vertices of each tree in order from root to leaf: $r$, $u$, $q - y - t$, $x - z$, and $s - w - v$.

## 22.5-3

> Professor Bacon claims that the algorithm for strongly connected components would be simpler if it used the original (instead of the transpose) graph in the second depth-first search and scanned the vertices in order of _increasing_ finishing times. Does this simpler algorithm always produce correct results?

Professor Bacon's suggestion doesn't work out. As an example, suppose that our graph is on the three vertices $\\{1, 2, 3\\}$ and consists of the edges $(2, 1), (2, 3), (3, 2)$. Then, we should end up with $\\{2, 3\\}$ and $\\{1\\}$ as our $\text{SCC}$'s. However, a possible $\text{DFS}$ starting at $2$ could explore $3$ before $1$, this would mean that the finish time of $3$ is lower than of $1$ and $2$. This means that when we first perform the $\text{DFS}$ starting at $3$. However, a $\text{DFS}$ starting at $3$ will be able to reach all other vertices. This means that the algorithm would return that the entire graph is a single $\text{SCC}$, even though this is clearly not the case since there is neither a path from $1$ to $2$ of from $1$ to $3$.

## 22.5-4

> Prove that for any directed graph $G$, we have $((G^\text T)^{\text{SCC}})^\text T = G^{\text{SCC}}$. That is, the transpose of the component graph of $G^\text T$ is the same as the component graph of $G$.

First observe that $C$ is a strongly connected component of $G$ if and only if it is a strongly connected component of $G^\text T$. Thus the vertex sets of $G^{\text{SCC}}$ and $(G^\text T)^{\text{SCC}}$ are the same, which implies the vertex sets of $((G^\text T)^\text{SCC})^\text T$ and $G^{\text{SCC}}$ are the same. It suffices to show that their edge sets are the same. Suppose $(v_i, v_j)$ is an edge in $((G^\text T)^{\text{SCC}})^\text T$. Then $(v_j, v_i)$ is an edge in $(G^\text T)^{\text{SCC}}$. Thus there exist $x \in C_j$ and $y \in C_i$ such that $(x, y)$ is an edge of $G^\text T$, which implies $(y, x)$ is an edge of $G$. Since components are preserved, this means that $(v_i, v_j)$ is an edge in $G^{\text{SCC}}$. For the opposite implication we simply note that for any graph $G$ we have $(G^\text T)^{\text T} = G$.

## 22.5-5

> Give an $O(V + E)$-time algorithm to compute the component graph of a directed graph $G = (V, E)$. Make sure that there is at most one edge between two vertices in the component graph your algorithm produces.

We have at our disposal an $O(V + E)$-time algorithm that computes strongly connected components. Let us assume that the output of this algorithm is a mapping $u.scc$, giving the number of the strongly connected component containing vertex $u$, for each vertex $u$. Without loss of generality, assume that $u.scc$ is an integer in the set $\\{1, 2, \ldots, |V|\\}$.

Construct the multiset (a set that can contain the same object more than once) $T = \\{u.scc: u \in V\\}$, and sort it by using counting sort. Since the values we are sorting are integers in the range $1$ to $|V|$, the time to sort is $O(V)$. Go through the sorted multiset $T$ and every time we find an element $x$ that is distinct from the one before it, add $x$ to $V^{\text{SCC}}$. (Consider the first element of the sorted set as "distinct from the one before it.") It takes $O(V)$ time to construct $V^{\text{SCC}}$.

Construct the set of ordered pairs

$$\text{$(x, y)$: there is an edge $(u, v) \in E$, $x = u.scc$, and $y = v.scc$}.$$

We can easily construct this set in $\Theta(E)$ time by going through all edges in $E$ and looking up $u.scc$ and $v.scc$ for each edge $(u, v) \in E$.

Having constructed $S$, remove all elements of the form $(x, x)$. Alternatively, when we construct $S$, do not put an element in $S$ when we find an edge $(u, v)$ for which $u.scc = v.scc$. $S$ now has at most $|E|$ elements.

Now sort the elements of $S$ using radix sort. Sort on one component at a time. The order does not matter. In other words, we are performing two passes of counting sort. The time to do so is $O(V + E)$, since the values we are sorting on are integers in the range $1$ to $|V|$.

Finally, go through the sorted set $S$, and every time we find an element $(x, y)$ that is distinct from the element before it (again considering the first element of the sorted set as distinct from the one before it), add $(x, y)$ to $E^{\text{SCC}}$. Sorting and then adding $(x, y)$ only if it is distinct from the element before it ensures that we add $(x, y)$ at most once. It takes $O(E)$ time to go through $S$ in this way, once $S$ has been sorted.

The total time is $O(V + E)$.

## 22.5-6

> Given a directed graph $G = (V, E)$, explain how to create another graph $G' = (V, E')$ such that (a) $G'$ has the same strongly connected components as $G$, (b) $G'$ has the same component graph as $G$, and \(c\) $E'$ is as small as possible. Describe a fast algorithm to compute $G'$.

The basic idea is to replace the edges within each $\text{SCC}$ by one simple, directed cycle and then remove redundant edges between $\text{SCC}$'s. Since there must be at least $k$ edges within an $\text{SCC}$ that has $k$ vertices, a single directed cycle of $k$ edges gives the $k$-vertex $\text{SCC}$ with the fewest possible edges.

The algorithm works as follows:

1. Identify all $\text{SCC}$'s of $G$. Time: $\Theta(V + E)$, using the $\text{SCC}$ algorithm in Section 22.5.
2. Form the component graph $G^{\text{SCC}}$. Time: $O(V + E)$, by Exercise 22.5-5.
3. Start with $E' = \emptyset$. Time: $O(1)$.
4. For each $\text{SCC}$ of $G$, let the vertices in the $\text{SCC}$ be $v_1, v_2, \ldots, v_k$, and add to $E'$ the directed edges $(v_1, v_2), (v_2, v_3), \ldots, (v_{k - 1}, v_k), (v_k, v_1)$. These edges form a simple, directed cycle that includes all vertices of the $\text{SCC}$. Time for all $\text{SCC}$'s: $O(V)$.
5. For each edge $(u, v)$ in the component graph $G^{\text{SCC}}$, select any vertex $x$ in $u$'s $\text{SCC}$ and any vertex $y$ in $v$'s $\text{SCC}$, and add the directed edge $(x, y)$ to $E'$. Time: $O(E)$.

## 22.5-7 

> A directed graph $G = (V, E)$ is ***semiconnected*** if, for all pairs of vertices $u, v \in V$, we have $u \leadsto v$ or $v \leadsto u$. Give an efficient algorithm to determine whether or not $G$ is semiconnected. Prove that your algorithm is correct, and analyze its running time.

To determine whether $G = (V, E)$ is semiconnected, do the following:

1. Call $\text{STRONGLY-CONNECTED-COMPONENTS}$.
2. Form the component graph. (By Exercise 22.5-5, you may assume that this takes $O(V + E)$ time.)
3. Topologically sort the component graph. (Recall that it's a dag.) Assuming that $G$ contains $k$ $\text{SCC}$'s, the topological sort gives a linear ordering $\langle v_1, v_2, \ldots, v_k \rangle$ of the vertices.
4. Verify that the sequence of vertices $\langle v_1, v_2, \ldots, v_k \rangle$ given by topological sort forms a linear chain in the component graph. That is, verify that the edges $(v_1, v_2), (v_2, v_3), \ldots, (v_{k - 1}, v_k)$ exist in the component graph. If the vertices form a linear chain, then the original graph is semiconnected; otherwise it is not.

Because we know that all vertices in each $\text{SCC}$ are mutually reachable from each other, it suffices to show that the component graph is semiconnected if and only if it contains a linear chain. We must also show that if there's a linear chain in the component graph, it's the one returned by topological sort.

We'll first show that if there's a linear chain in the component graph, then it's the one returned by topological sort. In fact, this is trivial. A topological sort has to respect every edge in the graph. So if there's a linear chain, a topological sort _must_ give us the vertices in order.

Now we'll show that the component graph is semiconnected if and only if it contains a linear chain.

First, suppose that the component graph contains a linear chain. Then for every pair of vertices $u$, $v$ in the component graph, there is a path between them. If $u$ precedes $v$ in the linear chain, then there's a path $u \leadsto v$. Otherwise, $v$ precedes $u$, and there's a path $v \leadsto u$.

Conversely, suppose that the component graph does not contain a linear chain. Then in the list returned by topological sort, there are two consecutive vertices $v_i$ and $v_{i + 1}$, but the edge$(v_i, v_{i + 1})$ is not in the component graph. Any edges out of $v_i$ are to vertices $v_j$, where $j > i + 1$, and so there is no path from $v_i$ to $v_{i + 1}$ in the component graph. And since $v_{i + 1}$ follows $v_i$ in the topological sort, there cannot be any paths at all from $v_{i + 1}$ to $v_i$. Thus, the component graph is not semiconnected.

Running time of each step:

1. $\Theta(V + E)$.
2. $O(V + E)$.
3. Since the component graph has at most $|V|$ vertices and at most $|E|$ edges, $O(V + E)$.
4. Also $O(V + E)$. We just check the adjacency list of each vertex $v_i$ in the component graph to verify that there's an edge $(v_i, v_{i + 1})$. We'll go through each adjacency list once.

Thus, the total running time is $\Theta(V + E)$.
