## 4.2-1

> Use Strassen's algorithm to compute the matrix product
>
> $$
> \begin{pmatrix}
> 1 & 3 \\\\
> 7 & 5
> \end{pmatrix}
> \begin{pmatrix}
> 6 & 8 \\\\
> 4 & 2
> \end{pmatrix}
> .
> $$
>
> Show your work.

The first matrices are

$$
\begin{array}{ll}
S_1 =  6 & S_6    =  8 \\\\
S_2 =  4 & S_7    = -2 \\\\
S_3 = 12 & S_8    =  6 \\\\
S_4 = -2 & S_9    = -6 \\\\
S_5 =  6 & S_{10} = 14.
\end{array}
$$

The products are

$$
\begin{aligned}
P_1 & =  1 \cdot 6  =   6 \\\\
P_2 & =  4 \cdot 2  =   8 \\\\
P_3 & =  6 \cdot 12 =  72 \\\\
P_4 & = -2 \cdot 5  = -10 \\\\
P_5 & =  6 \cdot 8  =  48 \\\\
P_6 & = -2 \cdot 6  = -12 \\\\
P_7 & = -6 \cdot 14 = -84.
\end{aligned}
$$

The four matrices are

$$
\begin{aligned}
C_{11} & = 48 + (-10) - 8 + (-12) = 18 \\\\
C_{12} & =  6 + 8 = 14 \\\\
C_{21} & = 72 + (-10) = 62 \\\\
C_{22} & = 48 + 6 - 72 - (-84) = 66.
\end{aligned}
$$

The result is

$$
\begin{pmatrix}
18 & 14 \\\\
62 & 66
\end{pmatrix}
.
$$

## 4.2-2

> Write pseudocode for Strassen's algorithm.

(Removed)

## 4.2-3

> How would you modify Strassen's algorithm to multiply $n \times n$ matrices in which $n$ is not an exact power of $2$? Show that the resulting algorithm runs in time $\Theta(n^{\lg7})$.

We can just extend it to an $n \times n$ matrix and pad it with zeroes. It's obviously $\Theta(n^{\lg7})$.

## 4.2-4

> What is the largest $k$ such that if you can multiply $3 \times 3$ matrices using $k$ multiplications (not assuming commutativity of multiplication), then you can multiply $n \times n$ matrices is time $o(n^{\lg 7})$? What would the running time of this algorithm be?

(Removed)

## 4.2-5

> V. Pan has discovered a way of multiplying $68 \times 68$ matrices using $132464$ multiplications, a way of multiplying $70 \times 70$ matrices using $143640$ multiplications, and a way of multiplying $72 \times 72$ matrices using $155424$ multiplications. Which method yields the best asymptotic running time when used in a divide-and-conquer matrix-multiplication algorithm? How does it compare to Strassen's algorithm?

Using what we know from the last exercise, we need to pick the smallest of the following

$$
\begin{aligned}
\log_{68} 132464 & \approx 2.795128 \\\\
\log_{70} 143640 & \approx 2.795122 \\\\
\log_{72} 155424 & \approx 2.795147.
\end{aligned}
$$

The fastest one asymptotically is $70 \times 70$ using $143640$.

## 4.2-6

> How quickly can you multiply a $kn \times n$ matrix by an $n \times kn$ matrix, using Strassen's algorithm as a subroutine? Answer the same question with the order of the input matrices reversed.

- $(kn \times n)(n \times kn)$ produces a $kn \times kn$ matrix. This produces $k^2$ multiplications of $n \times n$ matrices.
- $(n \times kn)(kn \times n)$ produces an $n \times n$ matrix. This produces $k$ multiplications and $k - 1$ additions.

## 4.2-7

> Show how to multiply the complex numbers $a + bi$ and $c + di$ using only three multiplications of real numbers. The algorithm should take $a$, $b$, $c$ and $d$ as input and produce the real component $ac - bd$ and the imaginary component $ad + bc$ separately.

The three matrices are

$$
\begin{aligned}
A & = (a + b)(c + d) = ac + ad + bc + bd \\\\
B & = ac \\\\
C & = bd.
\end{aligned}
$$

The result is

$$(B - C) + (A - B - C)i.$$
