> If we insert a set of $n$ items into a binary search tree, the resulting tree may be horribly unbalanced, leading to long search times. As we saw in Section 12.4, however, randomly built binary search trees tend to be balanced. Therefore, one strategy that, on average, builds a balanced tree for a fixed set of items would be to randomly permute the items and then insert them in that order into the tree.
>
> What if we do not have all the items at once? If we receive the items one at a time, can we still randomly build a binary search tree out of them?
>
> We will examine a data structure that answers this question in the affirmative. A **_treap_** is a binary search tree with a modified way of ordering the nodes. Figure 13.9 shows an example. As usual, each node $x$ in the tree has a key value $x.key$. In addition, we assign $x.priority$, which is a random number chosen independently for each node. We assume that all priorities are distinct and also that all keys are distinct. The nodes of the treap are ordered so that the keys obey the binary-search-tree property and the priorities obey the min-heap order property:
>
> - If $v$ is a left child of $u$, then $v.key < u.key$.
> - If $v$ is a right child of $u$, then $v.key > u.key$.
> - If $v$ is a child of $u$, then $v.priority > u.priority$.
>
> (This combination of properties is why the tree is called a "treap": it has features of both a binary search tree and a heap.)
>
> It helps to think of treaps in the following way. Suppose that we insert nodes $x_1, x_2, \ldots,x_n$, with associated keys, into a treap. Then the resulting treap is the tree that would have been formed if the nodes had been inserted into a normal binary search tree in the order given by their (randomly chosen) priorities, i.e., $x_i.priority < x_j.priority$ means that we had inserted $x_i$ before $x_j$.
>
> **a.** Show that given a set of nodes $x_1, x_2, \ldots, x_n$, with associated keys and priorities, all distinct, the treap associated with these nodes is unique.
>
> **b.** Show that the expected height of a treap is $\Theta(\lg n)$, and hence the expected time to search for a value in the treap is $\Theta(\lg n)$.
>
> Let us see how to insert a new node into an existing treap. The first thing we do is assign to the new node a random priority. Then we call the insertion algorithm, which we call $\text{TREAP-INSERT}$, whose operation is illustrated in Figure 13.10.
>
> **c.** Explain how $\text{TREAP-INSERT}$ works. Explain the idea in English and give pseudocode. ($\textit{Hint:}$ Execute the usual binary-search-tree insertion procedure and then perform rotations to restore the min-heap order property.)
>
> **d.** Show that the expected running time of $\text{TREAP-INSERT}$ is $\Theta(\lg n)$.
>
> $\text{TREAP-INSERT}$ performs a search and then a sequence of rotations. Although these two operations have the same expected running time, they have different costs in practice. A search reads information from the treap without modifying it. In contrast, a rotation changes parent and child pointers within the treap. On most computers, read operations are much faster than write operations. Thus we would like $\text{TREAP-INSERT}$ to perform few rotations. We will show that the expected number of rotations performed is bounded by a constant.
>
> In order to do so, we will need some definitions, which Figure 13.11 depicts. The **_left spine_** of a binary search tree $T$ is the simple path from the root to the node with the smallest key. In other words, the left spine is the simple path from the root that consists of only left edges. Symmetrically, the **_right spine_** of $T$ is the simple path from the root consisting of only right edges. The **_length_** of a spine is the number of nodes it contains.
>
> **e.** Consider the treap $T$ immediately after $\text{TREAP-INSERT}$ has inserted node $x$. Let $C$ be the length of the right spine of the left subtree of $x$. Let $D$ be the length of the left spine of the right subtree of $x$. Prove that the total number of rotations that were performed during the insertion of $x$ is equal to $C + D$.
>
> We will now calculate the expected values of $C$ and $D$. Without loss of generality, we assume that the keys are $1, 2, \ldots, n$ since we are comparing them only to one another.
>
> For nodes $x$ and $y$ in treap $T$, where $y \ne x$, let $k = x.key$ and $i = y.key$. We define indicator random variables
>
> $$X\_{ik} = \text{I\\{\$y\$ is in the right spine of the left subtree of \$x\$\\}}.$$
>
> **f.** Show that $X_{ik} = 1$ if and only if $y.priority > x.priority$, $y.key < x.key$, and, for every $z$ such that $y.key < z.key < x.key$, we have $y.priority < z.priority$.
>
> **g.** Show that
>
> $$
> \begin{aligned}
> \Pr\\{X_{ik} = 1\\}
>     & = \frac{(k - i - 1)!}{(k - i + 1)!} \\\\
>     & = \frac{1}{(k - i + 1)(k - i)}. \\\\
> \end{aligned}
> $$
>
> **h.** Show that
>
> $$
> \begin{aligned}
> \text E[C] & = \sum_{j = 1}^{k - 1} \frac{1}{j(j + 1)} \\\\
>            & = 1 - \frac{1}{k}.
> \end{aligned}
> $$
>
> **i.** Use a symmetry argument to show that
>
> $$\text E[D] = 1 - \frac{1}{n - k + 1}.$$
>
> **j.** Conclude that the expected number of rotations performed when inserting a node into a treap is less than $2$.

**a.** The root is the node with smallest priority, the root divides the sets into two subsets based on the key. In each subset, the node with smallest priority is selected as the root, thus we can uniquely determine a treap with a specific input.

**b.** For the priority of all nodes, each permutation corresponds to exactly one treap, that is, all nodes forms a BST in priority, since the priority of all nodes is spontaneous, treap is, essentially, randomly built binary search tress. Therefore, the expected height of a treap is $\Theta(\lg n)$.

**c.** First insert a node as usual using the binary-search-tree insertion procedure. Then perform left and right rotations until the parent of the inserted node no longer has larger priority.

**d.** Rotation is $\Theta(1)$, at most $h$ rotations, therefore the expected running time is $\Theta(\lg n)$.

**e.** Left rotation increase $C$ by $1$, right rotation increase $D$ by $1$.

**f.** The first two are obvious.

The min-heap property will not hold if $y.priority > z.priority$.

**g.**

$$\Pr\\{X_{ik} = 1\\} = \frac{(k - i - 1)!}{(k - i + 1)!} = \frac{1}{(k - i + 1)(k - i)}.$$

**h.**

$$
\begin{aligned}
\text E[C] & = \sum_{j = 1}^{k - 1} \frac{1}{(k - i + 1)(k - i)} \\\\
           & = \sum_{j = 1}^{k - 1} (\frac{1}{k - i} - \frac{1}{k - i + 1}) \\\\
           & = 1 - \frac{1}{k}.
\end{aligned}
$$

**i.**

$$
\begin{aligned}
\text E[D] & = \sum_{j = 1}^{n - k} \frac{1}{(k - i + 1)(k - i)} \\\\
           & = 1 - \frac{1}{n - k + 1}.
\end{aligned}
$$

**j.** By part (e), the number of rotations is $C + D$. By linearity of expectation, $\text E[C + D] = 2 - \frac{1}{k} - \frac{1}{n - k + 1} \le 2$ for any choice of $k$.
