> A ***$d$-ary heap*** is like a binary heap, but (with one possible exception) non-leaf nodes have $d$ children instead of $2$ children.
>
> **a.** How would you represent a $d$-ary heap in an array?
>
> **b.** What is the height of a $d$-ary heap of $n$ elements in terms of $n$ and $d$?
>
> **c.** Give an efficient implementation of $\text{EXTRACT-MAX}$ in a $d$-ary max-heap. Analyze its running time in terms of $d$ and $n$.
>
> **d.** Give an efficient implementation of $\text{INSERT}$ in a $d$-ary max-heap. Analyze its running time in terms of $d$ and $n$.
>
> **e.** Give an efficient implementation of $\text{INCREASE-KEY}(A, i, k)$, which flags an error if $k < A[i]$, but otherwise sets $A[i] = k$ and then updates the $d$-ary max-heap structure appropriately. Analyze its running time in terms of $d$ and $n$.

**a.** We can represent a $d$-ary heap in a $1$-dimensional array as follows. The root resides in $A[1]$, its $d$ children reside in order in $A[2]$ through $A[d + 1]$, their children reside in order in $A[d + 2]$ through $A[d^2 + d + 1]$, and so on. The following two procedures map a node with index $i$ to its parent and to its $j$ th child (for $1 \le j \le d$), respectively.

```cpp
d-ARY-PARENT(i)
    return floor((i - 2) / d + 1)
```

```cpp
d-ARY-CHILD(i, j)
    return d(i - 1) + j + 1
```

To convince yourself that these procedures really work, verify that

$$\text{$d$-ARY-PARENT($d$-ARY-CHILD($i, j$)) = $i$},$$

for any $1 \le j \le d$. Notice that the binary heap procedures are a special case of the above procedures when $d = 2$.

**b.** Since each node has $d$ children, the height of a $d$-ary heap with $n$ nodes is $\Theta(\log_d n) = \Theta(\lg n / \lg d)$.

**c.** The procedure $\text{HEAP-EXTRACT-MAX}$ given in the text for binary heaps works fine for $d$-ary heaps too. The change needed to support $d$-ary heaps is in $\text{MAX-HEAPIFY}$, which must compare the argument node to all d children instead of just $2$ children. The running time of $\text{HEAP-EXTRACT-MAX}$ is still the running time for $\text{MAX-HEAPIFY}$, but that now takes worst-case time proportional to the product of the height of the heap by the number of children examined at each node (at most $d$), namely $\Theta(d \log_d n) = \Theta(d\lg n / \lg d)$.

**d.** The procedure $\text{MAX-HEAP-INSERT}$ given in the text for binary heaps works fine for $d$-ary heaps too, assuming that $\text{HEAP-INCREASE-KEY}$ works for $d$-ary heaps. The worst-case running time is still $\Theta(h)$, where $h$ is the height of the heap. (Since only parent pointers are followed, the number of children a node has is irrelevant.) For a $d$-ary heap, this is $\Theta(\log_d n) = \Theta(\lg n / \lg d)$.

**e.** The $\text{HEAP-INCREASE-KEY}$ procedure with two small changes works for $d$-ary heaps. First, because the problem specifies that the new key is given by the parameter $k$, change instances of the variable $key$ to $k$. Second, change calls of $\text{PARENT}$ to calls of $d\text{-ARY-PARENT}$ from part (a).

In the worst case, the entire height of the tree must be traversed, so the worst-case running time is $\Theta(h) = \Theta(\log_d n) = \Theta(\lg n / \lg d)$.
