> In the **_parallel-machine-scheduling problem_**, we are given $n$ jobs, $J_1, J_2, \dots, J_n$, where each job $J_k$ has an associated nonnegative processing time of $p_k$. We are also given $m$ identical machines, $M_1, M_2, \dots, M_m$. Any job can run on any machine. A **_schedule_** specifies, for each job $J_k$, the machine on which it runs and the time period during which it runs. Each job $J_k$ must run on some machine $M_i$ for $p_k$ consecutive time units, and during that time period no other job may run on $M_i$. Let $C_k$ denote the **_completion time_** of job $J_k$, that is, the time at which job $J_k$ completes processing. Given a schedule, we define $C_{\max} = \max_{1 \le j \le n} C_j$ to be the **_makespan_** of the schedule. The goal is to find a schedule whose makespan is minimum.
>
> For example, suppose that we have two machines $M_1$ and $M_2$ and that we have four jobs $J_1, J_2, J_3, J_4$, with $p_1 = 2$, $p_2 = 12$, $p_3 = 4$, and $p_4 = 5$. Then one possible schedule runs, on machine $M_1$, job $J_1$ followed by job $J_2$, and on machine $M_2$, it runs job $J_4$ followed by job $J_3$. For this schedule, $C_1 = 2$, $C_2 = 14$, $C_3 = 9$, $C_4 = 5$, and $C_{\max} = 14$. An optimal schedule runs $J_2$ on machine $M_1$, and it runs jobs $J_1$, $J_3$, and $J_4$ on machine $M_2$. For this schedule, $C_1 = 2$, $C_2 = 12$, $C_3 = 6$, $C_4 = 11$, and $C_{\max} = 12$.
>
> Given a parallel-machine-scheduling problem, we let $C_{\max}^\*$ denote the makespan of an optimal schedule.
>
> **a.** Show that the optimal makespan is at least as large as the greatest processing time, that is,
>
> $$C_{\max}^\* \ge \max_{1 \le k \le n} p_k.$$
>
> **b.** Show that the optimal makespan is at least as large as the average machine load, that is,
>
> $$C_{\max}^\* \ge \frac 1 m \sum_{1 \le k \le n} p_k.$$
>
> Suppose that we use the following greedy algorithm for parallel machine scheduling: whenever a machine is idle, schedule any job that has not yet been scheduled.
>
> **c.** Write pseudocode to implement this greedy algorithm. What is the running time of your algorithm?
>
> **d.** For the schedule returned by the greedy algorithm, show that
>
> $$C_{\max} \le \frac 1 m \sum_{1 \le k \le n} p_k + \max_{1 \le k \le n} p_k.$$
>
> Conclude that this algorithm is a polynomial-time $2$-approximation algorithm.

(Omit!)
