> Recall the knapsack problem from Section 16.2. There are $n$ items, where the $i$th item is worth $v_i$ dollars and weighs $w_i$ pounds. We are also given a knapsack that can hold at most $W$ pounds. Here, we add the further assumptions that each weight $w_i$ is at most $W$ and that the items are indexed in monotonically decreasing order of their values: $v_1 \ge v_2 \ge \cdots \ge v_n$.
>
> In the 0-1 knapsack problem, we wish to find a subset of the items whose total weight is at most $W$ and whose total value is maximum. The fractional knapsack problem is like the 0-1 knapsack problem, except that we are allowed to take a fraction of each item, rather than being restricted to taking either all or none of each item. If we take a fraction $x_i$ of item $i$, where $0 \le x_i \le 1$, we contribute $x_iw_i$ to the weight of the knapsack and receive value $x_iv_i$. Our goal is to develop a polynomial-time $2$-approximation algorithm for the 0-1 knapsack problem.
>
> In order to design a polynomial-time algorithm, we consider restricted instances of the 0-1 knapsack problem. Given an instance $I$ of the knapsack problem, we form restricted instances $I_j$, for $j = 1, 2, \dots, n$, by removing items $1, 2, \dots, j - 1$ and requiring the solution to include item $j$ (all of item $j$ in both the fractional and 0-1 knapsack problems). No items are removed in instance $I_1$. For instance $I_j$, let $P_j$ denote an optimal solution to the 0-1 problem and $Q_j$ denote an optimal solution to the fractional problem.
>
> **a.** Argue that an optimal solution to instance $I$ of the 0-1 knapsack problem is one of $\\{P_1, P_2, \dots, P_n\\}$.
>
> **b.** Prove that we can find an optimal solution $Q_j$ to the fractional problem for instance $I_j$ by including item $j$ and then using the greedy algorithm in which at each step, we take as much as possible of the unchosen item in the set $\\{j + 1, j + 2, \dots, n\\}$ with maximum value per pound $v_i / w_i$.
>
> **c.** Prove that we can always construct an optimal solution $Q_j$ to the fractional problem for instance $I_j$ that includes at most one item fractionally. That is, for all items except possibly one, we either include all of the item or none of the item in the knapsack.
>
> **d.** Given an optimal solution $Q_j$ to the fractional problem for instance $I_j$, form solution $R_j$ from $Q_j$ by deleting any fractional items from $Q_j$. Let $v(S)$ denote the total value of items taken in a solution $S$. Prove that $v(R_j) \ge v(Q_j) / 2 \ge v(P_j) / 2$.
>
> **e.** Give a polynomial-time algorithm that returns a maximum-value solution from the set $\\{R_1, R_2, \dots, R_n\\}$, and prove that your algorithm is a polynomial-time $2$-approximation algorithm for the 0-1 knapsack problem.

(Omit!)
