> This problem investigates D. Willard's "$y$-fast tries" which, like van Emde Boas trees, perform each of the operations $\text{MEMBER}$, $\text{MINIMUM}$, $\text{MAXIMUM}$, $\text{PREDECESSOR}$, and $\text{SUCCESSOR}$ on elements drawn from a universe with size $u$ in $O(\lg\lg u)$ worst-case time. The $\text{INSERT}$ and $\text{DELETE}$ operations take $O(\lg\lg u)$ amortized time. Like reduced-space van Emde Boas trees (see Problem 20-1), $y$-fast tries use only $O(n)$ space to store $n$ elements. The design of $y$-fast tries relies on perfect hashing (see Section 11.5).
>
> As a preliminary structure, suppose that we create a perfect hash table containing not only every element in the dynamic set, but every prefix of the binary representation of every element in the set. For example, if $u = 16$, so that $\lg u = 4$, and $x = 13$ is in the set, then because the binary representation of $13$ is $1101$, the perfect hash table would contain the strings $1$, $11$, $110$, and $1101$. In addition to the hash table, we create a doubly linked list of the elements currently in the set, in increasing order.
>
> **a.** How much space does this structure require?
>
> **b.** Show how to perform the $\text{MINIMUM}$ and $\text{MAXIMUM}$ operations in $O(1)$ time; the $\text{MEMBER}$, $\text{PREDECESSOR}$, and $\text{SUCCESSOR}$ operations in $O(\lg\lg u)$ time; and the $\text{INSERT}$ and $\text{DELETE}$ operations in $O(\lg u)$ time.
>
> To reduce the space requirement to $O(n)$, we make the following changes to the data structure:
>
> - We cluster the $n$ elements into $n / \lg u$ groups of size $\lg u$. (Assume for now that $\lg u$ divides $n$.) The first group consists of the $\lg u$ smallest elements in the set, the second group consists of the next $\lg u$ smallest elements, and so on.
> - We designate a "representative" value for each group. The representative of the $i$th group is at least as large as the largest element in the $i$th group, and it is smaller than every element of the $(i + 1)$st group. (The representative of the last group can be the maximum possible element $u - 1$.) Note that a representative might be a value not currently in the set.
> - We store the $\lg u$ elements of each group in a balanced binary search tree, such as a red-black tree. Each representative points to the balanced binary search tree for its group, and each balanced binary search tree points to its group's representative.
>
> The perfect hash table stores only the representatives, which are also stored in a doubly linked list in increasing order.
>
> We call this structure a **_$y$-fast trie_**.
>
> **c.** Show that a $y$-fast trie requires only $O(n)$ space to store $n$ elements.
>
> **d.** Show how to perform the $\text{MINIMUM}$ and $\text{MAXIMUM}$ operations in $O(\lg\lg u)$ time with a $y$-fast trie.
>
> **e.** Show how to perform the $\text{MEMBER}$ operation in $O(\lg\lg u)$ time.
>
> **f.** Show how to perform the $\text{PREDECESSOR}$ and $\text{SUCCESSOR}$ operations in $O(\lg\lg u)$ time.
>
> **g.** Explain why the $\text{INSERT}$ and $\text{DELETE}$ operations take $\Omega(\lg\lg u)$ time.
>
> **h.** Show how to relax the requirement that each group in a $y$-fast trie has exactly $\lg u$ elements to allow $\text{INSERT}$ and $\text{DELETE}$ to run in $O(\lg\lg u)$ amortized time without affecting the asymptotic running times of the other operations.

**a.** By 11.5, the perfect hash table uses $O(m)$ space to store m elements. In a universe of size $u$, each element contributes $\lg u$ entries to the hash table, so the requirement is $O(n\lg u)$. Since the linked list requires $O(n)$, the total space requirement is $O(n\lg u)$.

**b.** $\text{MINIMUM}$ and $\text{MAXIMUM}$ are easy. We just examine the first and last elements of the associated doubly linked list. $\text{MEMBER}$ can actually be performed in $O(1)$, since we are simply checking membership in a perfect hash table. $\text{PREDECESSOR}$ and $\text{SUCCESSOR}$ are a bit more complicated.

Assume that we have a binary tree in which we store all the elements and their prefixes. When we query the hash table for an element, we get a pointer to that element's location in the binary search tree, if the element is in the tree, and $\text{NIL}$ otherwise. Moreover, assume that every leaf node comes with a pointer to its position in the doubly linked list. Let $x$ be the number whose successor we seek. Begin by performing a binary search of the prefixes in the hash table to find the longest hashed prefix $y$ which matches a prefix of $x$. This takes $O(\lg\lg u)$ since we can check if any prefix is in the hash table in $O(1)$.

Observe that $y$ can have at most one child in the BST, because if it had both children then one of these would share a longer prefix with $x$. If the left child is missing, have the left child pointer point to the largest labeled leaf node in the BST which is less than $y$. If the right child is missing, use its pointer to point to the successor of $y$. If $y$ is a leaf node then $y = x$, so we simply follow the pointer to $x$ in the doubly linked list, in $O(1)$, and its successor is the next element on the list. If $y$ is not a leaf node, we follow its predecessor or successor node, depending on which we need. This gives us $O(1)$ access to the proper element, so the total runtime is $O(\lg\lg u)$. $\text{INSERT}$ and $\text{DELETE}$ must take $O(\lg u)$ since we need to insert one entry into the hash table for each of their bits and update the pointers.

**c.** The doubly linked list has less than $n$ elements, while the binary search trees contains $n$ nodes, thus a $y$-fast trie requires $O(n)$ space.

**d.** $\text{MINIMUM}$: Find the minimum representative in the doubly linked list in $\Theta(1)$, then find the minimum element in the binary search tree in $O(\lg\lg u)$.

**e.** Find the smallest representative greater than $k$ with binary searching in $\Theta(\lg\lg u)$, find the element in the binary search tree in $O(\lg\lg u)$.

**f.** If we can find the largest representative greater than or equal to $x$, we can determine which binary tree contains the predecessor or successor of $x$. To do this, just call $\text{PREDECESSOR}$ or $\text{SUCCESSOR}$ on $x$ to locate the appropriate tree in $O(\lg\lg u)$. Since the tree has height $\lg u$, we can find the predecessor or successor in $O(\lg\lg u)$.

**g.** Same as **_e_**, we need to find the cluster in $\Theta(\lg\lg u)$, then the operations in the binary search tree takes $O(\lg\lg u)$.

**h.** We can relax the requirements and only impose the condition that each group has at least $\frac{1}{2}\lg u$ elements and at most $2\lg u$ elements.

- If a red-black tree is too big, we split it in half at the median.
- If a red-black tree is too small, we merge it with a neighboring tree.
- If this causes the merged tree to become too large, we split it at the median.
- If a tree splits, we create a new representative.
- If two trees merge, we delete the lost representative.

Any split or merge takes $O(\lg u)$ since we have to insert or delete an element in the data structure storing our representatives, which by part (b) takes $O(\lg u)$.

However, we only split a tree after at least $\lg u$ insertions, since the size of one of the red-black trees needs to increase from $\lg u$ to $2\lg u$ and we only merge two trees after at least $(1 / 2)\lg u$ deletions, because the size of the merging tree needs to have decreased from $\lg u$ to $(1 / 2)\lg u$. Thus, the amortized cost of the merges, splits, and updates to representatives is $O(1)$ per insertion or deletion, so the amortized cost is $O(\lg\lg u)$ as desired.
