---
title: "24.1 The Bellman-Ford algorithm"
---

## 24.1-1

> Run the Bellman-Ford algorithm on the directed graph of Figure 24.4, using vertex $z$ as the source. In each pass, relax edges in the same order as in the figure, and show the $d$ and $\pi$ values after each pass. Now, change the weight of edge $(z, x)$ to $4$ and run the algorithm again, using $s$ as the source.

<div>
$$
\begin{array}{c|ccccc}
  & s & t & x & y & z \\
d & 2 & 4 & 6 & 9 & 0 \\
\pi & z & x & y & z & \text{NIL}
\end{array}
$$
</div>

<div>
$$
\begin{array}{c|ccccc}
  & s & t & x & y & z \\
d & 0 & 0 & 2 & 7 & -2 \\
\pi & \text{NIL} & x & z & s & t
\end{array}
$$
</div>

## 24.1-2

> Prove Corollary 24.3.

Suppose there is a path from $s$ to $v$. Then there must be a shortest such path of length $\delta(s, v)$. It must have finite length since it contains at most $|V| - 1$ edges and each edge has finite length. By Lemma 24.2, $v.d = \delta(s, v) < \infty$ upon termination. 

On the other hand, suppose $v.d < \infty$ when $\text{BELLMAN-FORD}$ terminates. Recall that $v.d$ is monotonically decreasing throughout the algorithm, and $\text{RELAX}$ will update $v.d$ only if $u.d + w(u, v) < v.d$ for some $u$ adjacent to $v$. Moreover, we update $v.\pi = u$ at this point, so $v$ has an ancestor in the predecessor subgraph. Since this is a tree rooted at $s$, there must be a path from $s$ to $v$ in this tree. Every edge in the tree is also an edge in $G$, so there is also a path in $G$ from $s$ to $v$.

## 24.1-3

> Given a weighted, directed graph $G = (V, E)$ with no negative-weight cycles, let $m$ be the maximum over all vertices $v \in V$ of the minimum number of edges in a shortest path from the source $s$ to $v$. (Here, the shortest path is by weight, not the number of edges.) Suggest a simple change to the Bellman-Ford algorithm that allows it to terminate in $m + 1$ passes, even if $m$ is not known in advance.

If the greatest number of edges on any shortest path from the source is $m$, then the path-relaxation property tells us that after $m$ iterations of $\text{BELLMAN-FORD}$, every vertex $v$ has achieved its shortest-path weight in $v.d$. By the upper-bound property, after $m$ iterations, no $d$ values will ever change. Therefore, no $d$ values will change in the $(m + 1)$st iteration. Because we do not know $m$ in advance, we cannot make the algorithm iterate exactly $m$ times and then terminate. But if we just make the algorithm stop when nothing changes any more, it will stop after $m + 1$ iterations.

```
BELLMAN-FORD-(M + 1)(G, w, s)
    INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE(G, s)
    changes = TRUE
    while changes == TRUE
        changes = FALSE
        for each edge(u, v) ∈ G.E
            RELAX-M(u, v, w)
```

```
RELAX-M(u, v, w)
    if v.d > u.d + w(u, v)
        v.d = u.d + w(u, v)
        v.PI = u
        changes = TRUE
```

The test for a negative-weight cycle (based on there being a $d$ value that would change if another relaxation step was done) has been removed above, because this version of the algorithm will never get out of the **while** loop unless all $d$ values stop changing.

## 24.1-4

> Modify the Bellman-Ford algorithm so that it sets $v.d$ to $-\infty$ for all vertices $v$ for which there is a negative-weight cycle on some path from the source to $v$.


In particular, replace line 7 with $v.d = -\infty$.

```cpp
if v.d > u.d + w(u, v)
    v.d = -∞
```

## 24.1-5 $\star$

> Let $G = (V, E)$ be a weighted, directed graph with weight function $w : E \rightarrow \mathbb R$. Give an $O(VE)$-time algorithm to find, for each vertex $v \in V$, the value $\delta^*(v) = \min\_{u \in V} \{\delta(u, v)\}$.

```cpp
RELAX(u, v, w)
    if v.d > min(w(u, v), w(u, v) + u.d)
        v.d > min(w(u, v), w(u, v) + u.d)
        v.PI = u.PI
```

## 24.1-6 $\star$

> Suppose that a weighted, directed graph $G = (V, E)$ has a negative-weight cycle. Give an efficient algorithm to list the vertices of one such cycle. Prove that your algorithm is correct.

Based on exercise 24.1-4, $\text{DFS}$ from a vertex $u$ that $u.d = -\infty$, if the weight sum on the search path is negative and the next vertex is $\text{BLACK}$, then the search path forms a negative-weight cycle.
