---
title: "28-2 Splines"
menuTitle: "Problem 28-2"
---

> A pratical method for interpolating a set of points with a curve is to use **cubic splines**. We are given a set $\{(x\_i, y\_i): i = 0, 1, \ldots, n\}$ of $n + 1$ point-value pairs, where $x\_0 < x\_1 < \cdots < x\_n$. We wish to fit a piecewise-cubic curve (spline) $f(x)$ to the points. That is, the curve $f(x)$ is made up of $n$ cubic polynomials $f\_i(x) = a\_i + b\_ix + c\_ix^2 + d\_ix^3$ for $i = 0, 1, \ldots, n - 1$, where if $x$ falls in the range $x\_i \le x \le x\_{i + 1}$, then the value of the curve is given by $f(x) = f\_i(x - x\_i)$. The points $x\_i$ at which the cubic polynomials are ''pasted'' together are called **knots**. For simplicity, we shall assume that $x\_i = i$ for $i = 0, 1, \ldots, n$.
>
> To ensure continuity of $f(x)$, we require that
>
> <div>
> $$
> \begin{aligned}
> f(x_i)       & = f_i(0) = y_i, \\
> f(x_{i + 1}) & = f_i(1) = y_{i + 1}
> \end{aligned}
> $$
> </div>
>
> for $i = 0, 1, \ldots, n - 1$. To ensure that $f(x)$ is sufficiently smooth, we also insist that the first derivative be continuous at each knot:
>
> <div>
$$
> f'(x_{i + 1}) = f'_i(1) = f'_{i + 1}(0)
> $$
> </div>
>
> for $i = 0, 1, \ldots, n - 2$.
>
> **a.** Suppose that for $i = 0, 1, \ldots, n$, we are given not only the point-value pairs $\{(x\_i, y\_i)\}$ but also the first derivatives $D\_i = f^\prime(x\_i)$ at each knot. Express each coefficient $a\_i$, $b\_i$, $c\_i$ and $d\_i$ in terms of the values $y\_i$, $y\_{i + 1}$, $D\_i$, and $D\_{i + 1}$. (Remember that $x\_i = i$.) How quickly can we compute the $4n$ coefficients from the point-value pairs and first derivatives?
>
> The question remains of how to choose the first derivatives of $f(x)$ at the knots. One method is to require the second derivatives to be continuous at the knots:
>
> <div>
> $$
> f''(x_{i + 1}) = f''_i(1) = f''_{i + 1}(0)
> $$
> </div>
>
> for $i = 0, 1, \ldots, n - 2$. At the first and last knots, we assume that $f^{\prime\prime}(x\_0) = f^{\prime\prime}\_0(0) = 0$ and $f^{\prime\prime}(x\_n) = f^{\prime\prime}\_{n - 1}(1) = 0$; these assumptions make $f(x)$ a __*natural*__ cubic spline.
>
> **b.** Use the continuity constraints on the second derivative to show that for $i = 1, 2, \ldots, n - 1$,
>
> <div>
> $$
> D_{i - 1} + 4D_i + D_{i + 1} = 3(y_{i + 1} - y_{i - 1}). \tag{23.21}
> $$
> </div>
>
> **c.** Show that
>
> <div>
> $$
> \begin{aligned}
>       2D_0 + D_1 & = 3(y_1 - y_0), \tag{28.22} \\
> D_{n - 1} + 2D_n & = 3(y_n - y_{n - 1}). \tag{28.23}
> \end{aligned}
> $$
> </div>
>
> **d.** Rewrite equations $\text{(28.21)}$–$\text{(28.23)}$ as a matrix equation involving the vector $D = \langle D\_0, D\_1, \ldots, D\_n \rangle$ or unknowns. What attributes does the matrix in your equation have?
>
> **e.** Argue that a natural cubic spline can interpolate a set of $n + 1$ point-value pairs in $O(n)$ time (see Problem 28-1).
>
> **f.** Show how to determine a natural cubic spline that interpolates a set of $n + 1$ points $(x\_i, y\_i)$ satisfying $x\_0 < x\_1 < \cdots < x\_n$, even when $x\_i$ is not necessarily equal to $i$. What matrix equation must your method solve, and how quickly does your algorithm run?