> An **_integer linear-programming problem_** is a linear-programming problem with the additional constraint that the variables $x$ must take on integral values. Exercise 34.5-3 shows that just determining whether an integer linear program has a feasible solution is NP-hard, which means that there is no known polynomial-time algorithm for this problem.
>
> **a.** Show that weak duality (Lemma 29.8) holds for an integer linear program.
>
> **b.** Show that duality (Theorem 29.10) does not always hold for an integer linear program.
>
> **c.** Given a primal linear program in standard form, let us define $P$ to be the optimal objective value for the primal linear program, $D$ to be the optimal objective value for its dual, $IP$ to be the optimal objective value for the integer version of the primal (that is, the primal with the added constraint that the variables take on integer values), and $ID$ to be the optimal objective value for the integer version of the dual. Assuming that both the primal integer program and the dual integer program are feasible and bounded, show that
>
> $$IP \le P = D \le ID.$$

**a.** The proof for weak duality goes through identically. Nowhere in it does it use the integrality of the solutions.

**b.** Consider the linear program given in standard form by $A = (1)$, $b = (\frac{1}{2})$ and $c = (2)$. The highest we can get this is $0$ since that's that only value that $x$ can be. Now, consider the dual to this, that is, we are trying to minimize $\frac{x}{2}$ subject to the constraint that $x \ge 2$. This will be minimized when $x = 2$, so, the smallest solution we can get is $1$.

Since we have just exhibited an example of a linear program that has a different optimal solution as it's dual, the duality theorem does not hold for integer linear program.

**c.** The first inequality comes from looking at the fact that by adding the restriction that the solution must be integer valued, we obtain a set of feasible solutions that is a subset of the feasible solutions of the original primal linear program. Since, to get $IP$, we are taking the max over a subset of the things we are taking a max over to get $P$, we must get a number that is no larger. The third inequality is similar, except since we are taking min over a subset, the inequality goes the other way. The middle equality is given by Theorem 29.10.
