---
title: "24-2 Nesting boxes"
menuTitle: "Problem 24-2"
---

> A $d$-dimensional box with dimensions $(x\_1, x\_2, \ldots, x\_d)$ __*nests*__ within another box with dimensions $(y\_1, y\_2, \ldots, y\_d)$ if there exists a permutation $\pi$ on $\\{1, 2, \ldots, d\\}$ such that $x\_{\pi(1)} < y\_1$, $x\_{\pi(2)} < y\_2$, $\ldots$, $x\_{\pi(d)} < y\_d$.
>
> **a.** Argue that the nesting relation is transitive.
>
> **b.** Describe an efficient method to determine whether or not one $d$-dimensional box nests inside another.
>
> **c.** Suppose that you are given a set of $n$ $d$-dimensional boxes $\\{B\_1, B\_2, \ldots, B\_n\\}$. Give an efficient algorithm to find the longest sequence $\langle B\_{i\_1}, B\_{i\_2}, \ldots, B\_{i\_k} \rangle$ of boxes such that $B\_{i\_j}$ nests within $B\_{i\_{j + 1}}$ for $j = 1, 2, \ldots, k - 1$. Express the running time of your algorithm in terms of $n$ and $d$.

**a.** Consider boxes with dimensions $x = (x\_1, \ldots, x\_d)$, $y = (y\_1, \ldots, y\_d)$, and $z = (z\_1, \ldots, z\_d)$. Suppose there exists a permutation $\pi$ such that $x\_{\pi(i)} < y\_i$ for $i = 1, \ldots, d$ and there exists a permutation $\pi^\prime$ such that $y\_{\pi^\prime(i)} < z\_i$ for $i = 1, \ldots, d$, so that $x$ nests inside $y$ and $y$ nests inside $z$. Construct a permutation $\pi^{\prime\prime}$, where $\pi^{\prime\prime}(i) = \pi^\prime(\pi(i))$. Then for $i = 1, \ldots, d$, we have $x\_{\pi^{\prime\prime}(i)} = x\_{\pi^\prime(\pi(i))} < y\_{\pi^\prime(i)} < z\_i$, and so $x$ nests inside $z$.

**b.** Sort the dimensions of each box from longest to shortest. A box $X$ with sorted dimensions $(x\_1, x\_2, \ldots, x\_d)$ nests inside a box $Y$ with sorted dimensions $(y\_1, y\_2, \ldots, y\_d)$ if and only if $x\_i < y\_i$ for $i = 1, 2, \ldots, d$. The sorting can be done in $O(d\lg d)$ time, and the test for nesting can be done in $O(d)$ time, and so the algorithm runs in $O(d\lg d)$ time. This algorithm works because a $d$-dimensional box can be oriented so that every permutation of its dimensions is possible. (Experiment with a $3$-dimensional box if you are unsure of this).

**c.** Construct a dag $G = (V, E)$, where each vertex $v\_i$ corresponds to box $B\_i$, and $(v\_i, v\_j) \in E$ if and only if box $B\_i$ nests inside box $B\_j$. Graph $G$ is indeed a dag, because nesting is transitive and antireflexive (i.e., no box nests inside itself). The time to construct the dag is $O(dn^2 + dn\lg d)$, from comparing each of the $\binom{n}{2}$ pairs of boxes after sorting the dimensions of each.

Add a supersource vertex $s$ and a supersink vertex $t$ to $G$, and add edges $(s, v\_i)$ for all vertices $v\_i$ with $in\text-degree$ $0$ and $(v\_j, t)$ for all vertices $v\_j$ with outdegree $0$. Call the resulting dag $G^\prime$. The time to do so is $O(n)$.

Find a longest path from $s$ to $t$ in $G^\prime$. (Section 24.2 discusses how to find a longest path in a dag.) This path corresponds to a longest sequence of nesting boxes. The time to find a longest path is $O(n^2)$, since $G^\prime$ has $n + 2$ vertices and $O(n^2)$ edges.

Overall, this algorithm runs in $O(dn^2 + dn\lg d)$ time.
