> Suppose that, instead of sorting an array, we just require that the elements increase on average. More precisely, we call an $n$-element array $A$ **_k-sorted_** if, for all $i = 1, 2, \ldots, n - k$, the following holds:
>
> $$\frac{\sum_{j = i}^{i + k - 1} A[j]}{k} \le \frac{\sum_{j = i + 1}^{i + k} A[j]}{k}.$$
>
> **a.** What does it mean for an array to be $1$-sorted?
>
> **b.** Give a permutation of the numbers $1, 2, \ldots, 10$ that is $2$-sorted, but not sorted.
>
> **c.** Prove that an $n$-element array is $k$-sorted if and only if $A[i] \le A[i + k]$ for all $i = 1, 2, \ldots, n - k$.
>
> **d.** Give an algorithm that $k$-sorts an $n$-element array in $O(n\lg (n / k))$ time.
>
> We can also show a lower bound on the time to produce a $k$-sorted array, when $k$ is a constant.
>
> **e.** Show that we can sort a $k$-sorted array of length $n$ in $O(n\lg k)$ time. ($\textit{Hint:}$ Use the solution to Exercise 6.5-9.)
>
> **f.** Show that when $k$ is a constant, $k$-sorting an $n$-element array requires $\Omega(n\lg n)$ time. ($\textit{Hint:}$ Use the solution to the previous part along with the lower bound on comparison sorts.)

**a.** Ordinary sorting

**b.** $2, 1, 4, 3, 6, 5, 8, 7, 10, 9$.

**c.**

$$
\begin{aligned}
\frac{\sum_{j = i}^{i + k - 1} A[j]}{k} & \le \frac{\sum_{j = i + 1}^{i + k}A[j]}{k} \\\\
          \sum_{j = i}^{i + k- 1 } A[j] & \le \sum_{j = i + 1}^{i + k} A[j] \\\\
                                   A[i] & \le A[i + k].
\end{aligned}
$$

**d.** Shell-Sort, i.e., We split the $n$-element array into $k$ part. For each part, we use Insertion-Sort (or Quicksort) to sort in $O(n / k \lg(n / k))$ time. Therefore, the total running time is $k \cdot O(n / k \lg(n / k)) = O(n\lg(n / k))$.

**e.** Using a heap, we can sort a $k$-sorted array of length $n$ in $O(n\lg k)$ time. (The height of the heap is $\lg k$, the solution to Exercise 6.5-9.)

**f.** The lower bound of sorting each part is $\Omega(n / k\lg(n / k))$, so the total lower bound is $\Theta(n\lg n(/k))$. Since $k$ is a constant, therefore $\Theta(n\lg(n / k)) = \Omega(n\lg n)$.
