> The problem of merging two sorted lists arises frequently. We have seen a procedure for it as the subroutine $\text{MERGE}$ in Section 2.3.1. In this problem, we will prove a lower bound of $2n - 1$ on the worst-case number of comparisons required to merge two sorted lists, each containing $n$ items.
>
> First we will show a lower bound of $2n - o(n)$ comparisons by using a decision tree.
>
> **a.** Given $2n$ numbers, compute the number of possible ways to divide them into two sorted lists, each with $n$ numbers.
>
> **b.** Using a decision tree and your answer to part (a), show that any algorithm that correctly merges two sorted lists must perform at least $2n - o(n)$ comparisons.
>
> Now we will show a slightly tighter $2n - 1$ bound.
>
> **c.** Show that if two elements are consecutive in the sorted order and from different lists, then they must be compared.
>
> **d.** Use your answer to the previous part to show a lower bound of $2n - 1$ comparisons for merging two sorted lists.

**a.** There are $\binom{2n}{n}$ ways to divide $2n$ numbers into two sorted lists, each with $n$ numbers.

**b.** Based on Exercise C.1.13,

$$
\begin{aligned}
\binom{2n}{n} & \le 2^h \\\\
            h & \ge \lg\frac{(2n)!}{(n!)^2} \\\\
              & =   \lg (2n!) - 2\lg (n!) \\\\
              & =   \Theta(2n\lg 2n) - 2\Theta(n\lg n) \\\\
              & =   \Theta(2n).
\end{aligned}
$$

**c.** We have to know the order of the two consecutive elements.

**d.** Let list $A = 1, 3, 5, \ldots, 2n - 1$ and $B = 2, 4, 6, \ldots, 2n$. By part (c), we must compare $1$ with $2$, $2$ with $3$, $3$ with $4$, and so on up until we compare $2n - 1$ with $2n$. This amounts to a total of $2n - 1$ comparisons.
