---
title: "13-2 Join operation on red-black trees"
menuTitle: "Problem 13-2"
---

> The __*join*__ operation takes two dynamic sets $S\_1$ and $S\_2$ and an element $x$ such that for any $x\_1 \in S\_1$ and $x\_2 \in S\_2$, we have $x\_1.key \le x.key \le x\_2.key$. It returns a set $S = S\_1 \cup \{x\} \cup S\_2$. In this problem, we investigate how to implement the join operation on red-black trees.
>
> **a.** Given a red-black tree $T$, let us store its black-height as the new attribute $T.bh$. Argue that $\text{RB-INSERT}$ and $\text{RB-DELETE}$ can maintain the $bh$ attribute without requiring extra storage in the nodes of the tree and without increasing the asymptotic running times. Show that while descending through $T$, we can determine the black-height of each node we visit in $O(1)$ time per node visited.
>
> We wish to implement the operation $\text{RB-JOIN}(T\_1, x, T\_2)$, which destroys $T\_1$ and $T\_2$ and returns a red-black tree $T = T\_1 \cup {x} \cup T\_2$. Let $n$ be the total number of nodes in $T\_1$ and $T\_2$.
>
> **b.** Assume that $T\_1.bh \ge T\_2.bh$. Describe an $O(\lg n)$-time algorithm that finds a black node $y$ in $T\_1$ with the largest key from among those nodes whose black-height is $T\_2.bh$.
>
> **c.** Let $T\_y$ be the subtree rooted at $y$. Describe how $T\_y \cup \{x\} \cup T\_2$ can replace $T\_y$ in $O(1)$ time without destroying the binary-search-tree property.
>
> **d.** What color should we make $x$ so that red-black properties 1, 3, and 5 are maintained? Describe how to enforce properties 2 and 4 in $O(\lg n)$ time.
>
> **e.** Argue that no generality is lost by making the assumption in part (b). Describe the symmetric situation that arises when $T\_1.bh \le T\_2.bh$.
>
> **f.** Argue that the running time of $\text{RB-JOIN}$ is $O(\lg n)$.

**a.** 

- Initialize: $bh = 0$.
- $\text{RB-INSERT}$: if in the last step the root is red, we increase $bh$ by $1$.
- $\text{RB-DELETE}$: if $x$ is root, we decrease $bh$ by $1$.
- Each node: in the simple path, decrease $bh$ by $1$ each time we find a black node.

**b.** Move to the right child if the node has a right child, otherwise move to the left child. If the node is black, we decease $bh$ by 1. Repeat the step until $bh = T\_2.bh$.

**c.** The time complexity is $O(1)$.

```cpp
RB-JOIN'(Ty, x, T2)
    z.left = Ty
    z.right = T2
    z.parent = Ty.parent
    z.key = x
    if Ty.parent.left = Ty
        Ty.parent.left = z
    else Ty.parent.right = z
```

**d.** Red, because if both the colors of the roots of $T\_y$ and $T\_2$ are black and the color of $x.parent$ is red, then the color of $x$ is black and it'll change both the colors of the roots of $T\_y$ and $T\_2$ and recursively adjust to ensure that $\text{BLACK-HEIGHT}$ doesn't change.

The time complexity is $O(\lg n)$.

**e.** Same, if $T\_1.bh\le T\_2.bh$, then we can use the above algorithm symmetrically.

**f.** $O(1) + O(\lg n) = O(\lg n)$.
