---
title: "31.3 Modular arithmetic"
---

## 31.3-1

> Draw the group operation tables for the groups $(\mathbb{Z}\_4, +\_4)$ and $(\mathbb{Z}\_5^*, \cdot\_5)$. Show that these groups are isomorphic by exhibiting a one-to-one correspondence $\alpha$ between their elements such that $a + b \equiv c ~(\text{mod}~4)$ if and only if $\alpha(a) \cdot \alpha(b) \equiv \alpha(c) ~(\text{mod}~5)$.

* $(\mathbb{Z}\_4, +\_4)$: ${ 0, 1, 2, 3 }$.
* $(\mathbb{Z}\_5^*, \cdot\_5)$: ${ 1, 2,3,4 }$.

$\alpha(x) = 2^{x-1}$.

## 31.3-2

> List all subgroups of $\mathbb{Z}\_9$ and of $\mathbb{Z}\_{13}^*$.

* $\mathbb{Z}\_9{equation}   * $\langle 0 \rangle = { 0 }$,
   * $\langle 1 \rangle = { 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 }$,
   * $\langle 2 \rangle = { 0, 2, 4, 6, 8 }$.
* $\mathbb{Z}\_{13}^*{equation}   * $\langle 1 \rangle = { 1 }$,
   * $\langle 2 \rangle = { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 }$.

## 31.3-3

> Prove Theorem 31.14.

> A nonempty closed subset of a finite group is a subgroup.

* Closure: the subset is closed.
* Identity: suppose $a \in S'$, then $a^{(k)} \in S'$. Since the subset is finite, there must be a period such that $a^{(m)} = a^{(n)}$, hence $a^{(m)}a^{(-n)} = a^{(m - n)} = 1$, therefore the subset must contain the identity.
* Associativity: inherit from the origin group.
* Inverses: suppose $a^{(k)} = 1$, the inverse of element $a$ is $a^{(k - 1)}$ since $aa^{(k - 1)}=a^{(k)}=1$.

## 31.3-4

> Show that if $p$ is prime and $e$ is a positive integer, then

> $\phi(p^e) = p^{e-1}(p - 1)$.

$\phi(p^e) = p^e \cdot \left ( 1 - \frac{1}{p} \right ) = p^{e-1}(p - 1)$.

## 31.3-5

> Show that for any integer $n > 1$ and for any $a \in \mathbb{Z}\_n^*$, the function $f\_a : \mathbb{Z}\_n^* \rightarrow \mathbb{Z}\_n^*$ defined by $f\_a(x) = ax ~\text{mod}~ n$ is a permutation of $\mathbb{Z}\_n^*$.

To prove it is a permutation, we need to prove that 
* for each element $x \in \mathbb{Z}\_n^*$, $f\_a(x) \in \mathbb{Z}\_n^*$,
* the numbers generated by $f\_a$ are distinct.

Since $a \in \mathbb{Z}\_{n}^*$ and $x \in \mathbb{Z}\_n^*$, then $f\_a(x) = ax ~\text{mod}~ n \in \mathbb{Z}\_n^*$ by the closure property. 

Suppose there are two distinct numbers $x \in \mathbb{Z}\_n^*$ and $y \in \mathbb{Z}\_n^*$ that $f\_a(x) = f\_a(y)$,

{equation}<div>
$$\begin{array}{rlll}
f_a(x) &=& f_a(y) \\
ax ~\text{mod}~ n &=& ay ~\text{mod}~ n \\
(a ~\text{mod}~ n)(x ~\text{mod}~ n) &=& (a ~\text{mod}~ n)(y ~\text{mod}~ n) \\
(x ~\text{mod}~ n) &=& (y ~\text{mod}~ n) \\
x &\equiv& y & (\text{mod}~n)
\end{array}
$$
</div>
{equation}which contradicts the assumption, therefore the numbers generated by $f\_a$ are distinct.


