> In the ***depth-determination problem***, we maintain a forest $\mathcal F = \\{T_i\\}$ of rooted trees under three operations:
>
> $\text{MAKE-TREE}(v)$ creates a tree whose only node is $v$.
>
> $\text{FIND-DEPTH}(v)$ returns the depth of node $v$ within its tree.
>
> $\text{GRAFT}(r, v)$ makes node $r$, which is assumed to be the root of a tree, become the child of node $v$, which is assumed to be in a different tree than $r$ but may or may not itself be a root.
>
> **a.** Suppose that we use a tree representation similar to a disjoint-set forest: $v.p$ is the parent of node $v$, except that $v.p = v$ if $v$ is a root. Suppose further that we implement $\text{GRAFT}(r, v)$ by setting $r.p = v$ and $\text{FIND-DEPTH}(v)$ by following the find path up to the root, returning a count of all nodes other than $v$ encountered. Show that the worst-case running time of a sequence of $m$ $\text{MAKE-TREE}$, $\text{FIND-DEPTH}$, and $\text{GRAFT}$ operations is $\Theta(m^2)$.
>
> By using the union-by-rank and path-compression heuristics, we can reduce the worst-case running time. We use the disjoint-set forest $\mathcal S = \\{S_i\\}$, where each set $S_i$ (which is itself a tree) corresponds to a tree $T_i$ in the forest $\mathcal F$. The tree structure within a set $S_i$, however, does not necessarily correspond to that of $T_i$. In fact, the implementation of $S_i$ does not record the exact parent-child relationships but nevertheless allows us to determine any node's depth in $T_i$.
>
> The key idea is to maintain in each node $v$ a "pseudodistance" $v.d$, which is defined so that the sum of the pseudodistances along the simple path from $v$ to the root of its set $S_i$ equals the depth of $v$ in $T_i$. That is, if the simple path from $v$ to its root in $S_i$ is $v_0, v_1, \ldots, v_k$, where $v_0 = v$ and $v_k$ is $S_i$'s root, then the depth of $v$ in $T_i$ is $\sum_{j = 0}^k v_j.d$.
>
> **b.** Give an implementation of $\text{MAKE-TREE}$.
>
> **c.** Show how to modify $\text{FIND-SET}$ to implement $\text{FIND-DEPTH}$. Your implementation should perform path compression, and its running time should be linear in the length of the find path. Make sure that your implementation updates pseudodistances correctly.
>
> **d.** Show how to implement $\text{GRAFT}(r, v)$, which combines the sets containing $r$ and $v$, by modifying the $\text{UNION}$ and $\text{LINK}$ procedures. Make sure that your implementation updates pseudodistances correctly. Note that the root of a set $S_i$ is not necessarily the root of the corresponding tree $T_i$.
>
> **e.** Give a tight bound on the worst-case running time of a sequence of $m$ $\text{MAKE-TREE}$, $\text{FIND-DEPTH}$, and $\text{GRAFT}$ operations, $n$ of which are $\text{MAKE-TREE}$ operations.

**a.** Denote the number of nodes by $n$, and let $n = (m + 1) / 3$, so that $m = 3n - 1$. First, perform the $n$ operations $\text{MAKE-TREE}(v_1)$, $\text{MAKE-TREE}(v_2)$, $\ldots$, $\text{MAKE-TREE}(v_n)$. Then perform the sequence of $n - 1$ $\text{GRAFT}$ operations $\text{GRAFT}(v_1, v_2)$, $\text{GRAFT}(v_2, v_3)$, $\ldots$, $\text{GRAFT}(v_n - 1, v_n)$; this sequence produces a single disjoint-set tree that is a linear chain of $n$ nodes with $v_n$ at the root and $v_1$ as the only leaf. Then perform $\text{FIND-DEPTH}(v_1)$ repeatedly, $n$ times. The total number of operations is $n + (n - 1) + n = 3n - 1 = m$.

Each $\text{MAKE-TREE}$ and $\text{GRAFT}$ operation takes $O(1)$ time. Each $\text{FIND-DEPTH}$ operation has to follow an $n$-node find path, and so each of the $n$ $\text{FIND-DEPTH}$ operations takes $\Theta(n)$ time. The total time is $n \cdot \Theta(n) + (2n - 1) \cdot O(1) = \Theta(n^2) = \Theta(m^2)$.

**b.** $\text{MAKE-TREE}$ is like $\text{MAKE-SET}$, except that it also sets the $d$ value to $0$:

```cpp
MAKE-TREE(v)
    v.p = v
    v.rank = 0
    v.d = 0
```
It is correct to set $v.d$ to $0$, because the depth of the node in the single-node disjoint-set tree is $0$, and the sum of the depths on the find path for $v$ consists only of $v.d$.

**c.** $\text{FIND-DEPTH}$ will call a procedure $\text{FIND-ROOT}$:

```cpp
FIND-ROOT(v)
    if v.p != v.p.p
        y = v.p
        v.p = FIND-ROOT(y)
        v.d = v.d + y.d
    return v.p
```

```cpp
FIND-DEPTH(v)
    FIND-ROOT(v)    // no need to save the return value
    if v == v.p
        return v.d
    else return v.d + v.p.d
```

$\text{FIND-ROOT}$ performs path compression and updates pseudodistances along the find path from $v$. It is similar to $\text{FIND-SET}$ on page 571, but with three changes. First, when $v$ is either the root or a child of a root (one of these conditions holds if and only if $v.p = v.p.p$) in the disjoint-set forest, we don't have to recurse; instead, we just return $v.p$. Second, when we do recurse, we save the pointer $v.p$ into a new variable $y$. Third, when we recurse, we update $v.d$ by adding into it the $d$ values of all nodes on the find path that are no longer proper ancestors of $v$ after path compression; these nodes are precisely the proper ancestors of $v$ other than the root. Thus, as long as $v$ does not start out the $\text{FIND-ROOT}$ call as either the root or a child of the root, we add $y.d$ into $v.d$. Note that $y.d$ has been updated prior to updating $v.d$, if $y$ is also neither the root nor a child of the root.

$\text{FIND-DEPTH}$ first calls $\text{FIND-ROOT}$ to perform path compression and update pseudodistances. Afterward, the find path from $v$ consists of either just $v$ (if $v$ is a root) or just $v$ and $v.p$ (if $v$ is not a root, in which case it is a child of the root after path compression). In the former case, the depth of $v$ is just $v.d$, and in the latter case, the depth is $v.d + v.p.d$.

**d.** Our procedure for $\text{GRAFT}$ is a combination of $\text{UNION}$ and $\text{LINK}$:

```cpp
GRAPT(r, v)
    r' = FIND-ROOT(r)
    v' = FIND-ROOT(v)
    z = FIND-DEPTH(v)
    if r'.rank > v'.rank
        v'.p = r'
        r'.d = r'.d + z + 1
        v'.d = v'.d - r'.d
    else r'.p = v'
        r'.d = r'.d + z + 1 - v'.d
        if r'.rank == v'.rank
            v'.rank = v'.rank + 1
```

This procedure works as follows. First, we call $\text{FIND-ROOT}$ on $r$ and $v$ in order to find the roots $r'$ and $v'$, respectively, of their trees in the disjoint-set forest. As we saw in part \(c\), these $\text{FIND-ROOT}$ calls also perform path compression and update pseudodistances on the find paths from $r$ and $v$. We then call $\text{FIND-DEPTH}(v)$, saving the depth of $v$ in the variable $z$. (Since we have just compressed $v$'s find path, this call of $\text{FIND-DEPTH}$ takes $\text{O(1)}$ time.) Next, we emulate the action of $\text{LINK}$, by making the root ($r'$ or $v'$) of smaller rank a child of the root of larger rank; in case of a tie, we make $r'$ a child of $v'$.

If $v'$ has the smaller rank, then all nodes in $r$'s tree will have their depths increased by the depth of $v$ plus $1$ (because $r$ is to become a child of $v$). Altering the psuedodistance of the root of a disjoint-set tree changes the computed depth of all nodes in that tree, and so adding $z + 1$ to $r'.d$ accomplishes this update for all nodes in $r$'s disjoint-set tree. Since $v'$ will become a child of $r'$ in the disjoint-set forest, we have just increased the computed depth of all nodes in the disjoint-set tree rooted at $v'$ by $r'.d$. These computed depths should not have changed, however. Thus, we subtract off $r'.d$ from $v'.d$, so that the sum $v'.d + r'.d$ after making $v'$ a child of $r'$ equals $v'.d$ before making $v'$ a child of $r'$.

On the other hand, if $r'$ has the smaller rank, or if the ranks are equal, then $r'$ becomes a child of $v'$ in the disjoint-set forest. In this case, $v'$ remains a root in the disjoint-set forest afterward, and we can leave $v'.d$ alone. We have to update $r'.d$, however, so that after making $r'$ a child of $v'$, the depth of each node in $r$'s disjoint-set tree is increased by $z + 1$. We add $z + 1$ to $r'.d$, but we also subtract out $v'.d$, since we have just made $r'$ a child of $v'$. Finally, if the ranks of $r'$ and $v'$ are equal, we increment the rank of $v'$, as is done in the $\text{LINK}$ procedure.

**e.** The asymptotic running times of $\text{MAKE-TREE}$, $\text{FIND-DEPTH}$, and $\text{GRAFT}$ are equivalent to those of $\text{MAKE-SET}$, $\text{FIND-SET}$, and $\text{UNION}$, respectively. Thus, a sequence of $m$ operations, $n$ of which are $\text{MAKE-TREE}$ operations, takes $\Theta(m\alpha(n))$ time in the worst case.
