> The **_least common ancestor_** of two nodes $u$ and $v$ in a rooted tree $T$ is the node $w$ that is an ancestor of both $u$ and $v$ and that has the greatest depth in $T$. In the **_off-line least-common-ancestors problem_**, we are given a rooted tree $T$ and an arbitrary set $P = \\{\\{u, v\\}\\}$ of unordered pairs of nodes in $T$, and we wish to determine the least common ancestor of each pair in $P$.
>
> To solve the off-line least-common-ancestors problem, the following procedure performs a tree walk of $T$ with the initial call $\text{LCA}(T.root)$. We assume that each node is colored $\text{WHITE}$ prior to the walk.
>
> ```cpp
> LCA(u)
>     MAKE-SET(u)
>     FIND-SET(u).ancestor = u
>     for each child v of u in T
>         LCA(v)
>         UNION(u, v)
>         FIND-SET(u).ancestor = u
>     u.color = BLACK
>     for each node v such that {u, v} ∈ P
>         if v.color == BLACK
>             print "The least common ancestor of" u "and" v "is" FIND-SET(v).ancestor
> ```
>
> **a.** Argue that line 10 executes exactly once for each pair $\\{u, v\\} \in P$.
>
> **b.** Argue that at the time of the call $\text{LCA}(u)$, the number of sets in the disjoint-set data structure equals the depth of $u$ in $T$.
>
> **c.** Prove that $\text{LCA}$ correctly prints the least common ancestor of $u$ and $v$ for each pair $\\{u, v\\} \in P$.
>
> **d.** Analyze the running time of $\text{LCA}$, assuming that we use the implementation of the disjoint-set data structure in Section 21.3.

**a.** Suppose that we let $\le_{LCA}$ to be an ordering on the vertices so that $u \le_{LCA} v$ if we run line 7 of $\text{LCA}(u)$ before line 7 of $\text{LCA}(v)$. Then, when we are running line 7 of $\text{LCA}(u)$, we immediately go on to the **for** loop on line 8.

So, while we are doing this **for** loop, we still haven't called line 7 of $\text{LCA}(v)$. This means that $v.color$ is white, and so, the pair $\\{u, v\\}$ is not considered during the run of $\text{LCA}(u)$. However, during the **for** loop of $\text{LCA}(v)$, since line 7 of $\text{LCA}(u)$ has already run, $u.color = black$. This means that we will consider the pair $\\{u, v\\}$ during the running of $\text{LCA}(v)$.

It is not obvious what the ordering $\le_{LCA}$ is, as it will be implementation dependent. It depends on the order in which child vertices are iterated in the **for** loop on line 3. That is, it doesn't just depend on the graph structure.

**b.** We suppose that it is true prior to a given call of $\text{LCA}$, and show that this property is preserved throughout a run of the procedure, increasing the number of disjoint sets by one by the end of the procedure. So, supposing that $u$ has depth $d$ and there are $d$ items in the disjoint set data structure before it runs, it increases to $d + 1$ disjoint sets on line 1. So, by the time we get to line 4, and call $\text{LCA}$ of a child of $u$, there are $d + 1$ disjoint sets, this is exactly the depth of the child. After line 4, there are now $d + 2$ disjoint sets, so, line 5 brings it back down to $d + 1$ disjoint sets for the subsequent times through the loop. After the loop, there are no more changes to the number of disjoint sets, so, the algorithm terminates with $\text{d + 1}$ disjoint sets, as desired. Since this holds for any arbitrary run of $\text{LCA}$, it holds for all runs of $\text{LCA}$.

**c.** Suppose that the pair $u$ and $v$ have the least common ancestor $w$. Then, when running $\text{LCA}(w)$, $u$ will be in the subtree rooted at one of $w$'s children, and $v$ will be in another. WLOG, suppose that the subtree containing $u$ runs first.

So, when we are done with running that subtree, all of their ancestor values will point to $w$ and their colors will be black, and their ancestor values will not change until $\text{LCA}(w)$ returns. However, we run $\text{LCA}(v)$ before $\text{LCA}(w)$ returns, so in the **for** loop on line 8 of $\text{LCA}(v)$, we will be considering the pair $\\{u, v\\}$, since $u.color = black$. Since $u.ancestor$ is still $w$, that is what will be output, which is the correct answer for their $\text{LCA}$.

**d.** The time complexity of lines 1 and 2 are just constant. Then, for each child, we have a call to the same procedure, a $\text{UNION}$ operation which only takes constant time, and a $\text{FIND-SET}$ operation which can take at most amortized inverse Ackerman's time. Since we check each and every thing that is adjacent to $u$ for being black, we are only checking each pair in $P$ at most twice in lines 8-10, among all the runs of $\text{LCA}$. This means that the total runtime is $O(|T|\alpha(|T|) + |P|)$.
