---
title: "29.2 Formulating problems as linear programs"
---

## 29.2-1

> Put the single-pair shortest-path linear program from $\text{(29.44)}$–$\text{(29.46)}$ into standard form.

## 29.2-2

> Write out explicitly the linear program corresponding to finding the shortest path from node $s$ to node $y$ in Figure 24.2(a).

## 29.2-3

> In the single-source shortest-paths problem, we want to find the shortest-path weights from a source vertex $s$ to all vertices $v \in V$. Given a graph $G$, write a linear program for which the solution has the property that $d\_v$ is the shortest-path weight from $s$ to $v$ for each vertex $v \in V$.

## 29.2-4

> Write out explicitly the linear program corresponding to finding the maximum flow in Figure 26.1(a).

## 29.2-5

> Rewrite the linear program for maximum flow $\text{(29.47)}$–$\text{(29.50)}$ so that it uses only $O(V + E)$ constraints.

## 29.2-6

> Write a linear program that, given a bipartite graph $G = (V, E)$ solves the maximum-bipartite-matching problem.

## 29.2-7

> In the __*minimum-cost multicommodity-flow problem*__, we are given directed graph $G = (V, E)$ in which each edge $(u, v) \in E$ has a nonnegative capacity $c(u, v) \ge 0$ and a cost $a(u, v)$. As in the multicommodity-flow problem, we are given $k$ different commodities, $K\_1, K\_2, \ldots, K\_k$, where we specify commodity $i$ by the triple $K\_i = (s\_i, t\_i, d\_i)$. We define the flow $f\_i$ for commodity $i$ and the aggregate flow $f\_{uv}$ on edge $(u, v)$ as in the multicommodity-flow problem. A feasible flow is one in which the aggregate flow on each edge $(u, v)$ is no more than the capacity of edge $(u, v)$. The cost of a flow is $\sum\_{u, v \in V} a(u, v)f\_{uv}$, and the goal is to find the feasible flow of minimum cost. Express this problem as a linear program.