> Give asymptotic upper and lower bounds for $T(n)$ in each of the following recurrences. Assume that $T(n)$ is constant for sufficiently small $n$. Make your bounds as tight as possible, and justify your answers.
>
> **a.** $T(n) = 4T(n / 3) + n\lg n$.
>
> **b.** $T(n) = 3T(n / 3) + n / \lg n$.
>
> **c.** $T(n) = 4T(n / 2) + n^2\sqrt n$.
>
> **d.** $T(n) = 3T(n / 3 - 2) + n / 2$.
>
> **e.** $T(n) = 2T(n / 2) + n / \lg n$.
>
> **f.** $T(n) = T(n / 2) + T(n / 4) + T(n / 8) + n$.
>
> **g.** $T(n) = T(n - 1) + 1 / n$.
>
> **h.** $T(n) = T(n - 1) + \lg n$.
>
> **i.** $T(n) = T(n - 2) + 1 / \lg n$.
>
> **j.** $T(n) = \sqrt nT(\sqrt n) + n$

**a.** By master theorem, $T(n) = \Theta(n^{\log_3 4})$.

**b.**

By the recursion-tree method, we can guess that $T(n) = \Theta(n\log_3\log_3 n)$.

We start by proving the upper bound.

Suppose $k < n \implies T(k) \le ck \log_3\log_3 k - k$, where we subtract a lower order term to strengthen our induction hypothesis.

It follows that

$$
\begin{aligned}
T(n) & \le 3 (c \frac{n}{3} \log_3\log_3 \frac{n}{3} - \frac{n}{3}) + \frac{n}{\lg n} \\\\
     & \le c n \log_3\log_3 n - n + \frac{n}{\lg n} \\\\
     & \le c n \log_3\log_3 n,
\end{aligned}
$$

if $n$ is sufficiently large.

The lower bound can proved analogously.

**c.** By master theorem, $T(n) = \Theta(n^{2.5})$.

**d.** It is $\Theta(n\lg n)$. The subtraction occurring inside the argument to $T$ won't change the asymptotics of the solution, that is, for large $n$ the division is so much more of a change than the subtraction that it is the only part that matters. once we drop that subtraction, the solution comes by the master theorem.

**e.** By the same reasoning as part (b), the function is $O(n\lg n)$ and $\Omega(n^{1 - \epsilon})$ for every $\epsilon$ and so is $\tilde O(n)$, see [Problem 3-5](../../../Chap03/Problems/3-5).

**f.** We guess $T(n) \le cn$,

$$
\begin{aligned}
T(n) & =   T(n / 2) + T(n / 4) + T(n / 8) + n \\\\
     & \le \frac{7}{8}cn + n \le cn. \\\\
\end{aligned}
$$

where the last step holds for $c \ge 8$.

**g.** Recall that $\chi_A$ denotes the indicator function of $A$. We see that the sum is

$$T(0) + \sum_{j = 1}^n \frac{1}{j} = T(0) + \int_1^{n + 1}\sum_{j = 1}^{n + 1} \frac{\chi_{j, j + 1}(x)}{j}dx.$$

Since $\frac{1}{x}$ is monatonically decreasing, we have that for every $i \in \mathbb Z^+$,

$$\text{sup}\_{x \in (i, i + 1)} \sum\_{j = 1}^{n + 1} \frac{\chi_{j, j + 1}(x)}{j} - \frac{1}{x} = \frac{1}{i} - \frac{1}{i + 1} = \frac{1}{i(i + 1)}.$$

Our expression for $T(n)$ becomes

$$T(N) = T(0) + \int_1^{n + 1} \Big(\frac{1}{x} + O(\frac{1}{\lfloor x \rfloor(\lfloor x \rfloor + 1)})\Big)dx.$$

We deal with the error term by first chopping out the constant amount between 1 and 2 and then bound the error term by $O(\frac{1}{x(x - 1)})$ which has an anti-derivative (by method of partial fractions) that is $O(\frac{1}{n})$,

$$
\begin{aligned}
T(N) & = \int_1^{n + 1} \frac{dx}{x} + O(\frac{1}{n}) \\\\
     & = \lg n + T(0) + \frac{1}{2} + O(\frac{1}{n}).
\end{aligned}
$$

This gets us our final answer of $T(n) = \Theta(\lg n)$.

**h.** We see that we explicity have

$$
\begin{aligned}
T(n) & = T(0) + \sum_{j = 1}^n \lg j \\\\
     & = T(0) + \int_1^{n + 1} \sum_{j = 1}^{n + 1} \chi_{(j, j + 1)}(x) \lg j dx.
\end{aligned}
$$

Similarly to above, we will relate this sum to the integral of $\lg x$.

$$\text{sup}\_{x \in (i, i + 1)} \sum\_{j = 1}^{n + 1} \chi\_{(j, j + 1)}(x) \lg j - \lg x = \lg(j + 1) - \lg j = \lg \Big(\frac{j + 1}{j}\Big).$$

Therefore,

$$
\begin{aligned}
T(n) & \le \int_i^n \lg(x + 2) + \lg x - \lg(x + 1)dx \\\\
     & (1 + O(\frac{1}{\lg n})) \Theta(n\lg n).
\end{aligned}
$$

**i.** See the approach used in the previous two parts, we will get $T(n) = \Theta(\frac{n}{\lg n})$.

**j.** Let $i$ be the smallest $i$ so that $n^{\frac{1}{2^i}} < 2$. We recall from a previous problem (3-6.e) that this is $\lg\lg n$ Expanding the recurrence, we have that it is

$$
\begin{aligned}
T(n) & = n^{1 - \frac{1}{2^i}}T(2) + n + n\sum_{j = 1}^i \\\\
     & = \Theta(n\lg\lg n).
\end{aligned}
$$
