> An $m \times n$ array $A$ of real numbers is a **Monge array** if for all $i$, $j$, $k$, and $l$ such that $1 \le i < k \le m$ and $1 \le j < l \le n$, we have
>
> $$A[i, j] + A[k, l] \le A[i, l] + A[k, j].$$
>
> In other words, whenever we pick two rows and two columns of a Monge array and consider the four elements at the intersections of the rows and columns, the sum of the upper-left and lower-right elements is less than or equal to the sum of the lower-left and upper-right elements. For example, the following array is Monge:
>
> $$
> \begin{matrix}
> 10 & 17 & 13 & 28 & 23 \\\\
> 17 & 22 & 16 & 29 & 23 \\\\
> 24 & 28 & 22 & 34 & 24 \\\\
> 11 & 13 &  6 & 17 &  7 \\\\
> 45 & 44 & 32 & 37 & 23 \\\\
> 36 & 33 & 19 & 21 &  6 \\\\
> 75 & 66 & 51 & 53 & 34
> \end{matrix}
> $$
>
> **a.** Prove that an array is Monge if and only if for all $i = 1, 2, \ldots, m - 1$, and $j = 1, 2, \ldots, n - 1$ we have
>
> $$A[i, j] + A[i + 1,j + 1] \le A[i, j + 1] + A[i + 1, j].$$
>
> ($\textit{Hint:}$ For the "if" part, use induction seperately on rows and columns.)
>
> **b.** The following array is not Monge. Change one element in order to make it Monge. ($\textit{Hint:}$ Use part (a).)
>
> $$
> \begin{matrix}
> 37 & 23 & 22 & 32 \\\\
> 21 &  6 &  7 & 10 \\\\
> 53 & 34 & 30 & 31 \\\\
> 32 & 13 &  9 &  6 \\\\
> 43 & 21 & 15 &  8
> \end{matrix}
> $$
>
> **c.** Let $f(i)$ be the index of the column containing the leftmost minimum element of row $i$. Prove that $f(1) \le f(2) \le \cdots \le f(m)$ for any $m \times n$ Monge array.
>
> **d.** Here is a description of a divide-and-conquer algorithm that computes the leftmost minimum element in each row of an $m \times n$ Monge array $A$:
>
> Construct a submatrix $A'$ of $A$ consisting of the even-numbered rows of $A$. Recursively determine the leftmost minimum for each row in $A'$. Then compute the leftmost minimum in the odd-numbered rows of $A$.
>
> Explain how to compute the leftmost minimum in the odd-numbered rows of $A$ (given that the leftmost minimum of the even-numbered rows is known) in $O(m + n)$ time.
>
> **e.** Write the recurrence describing the running time of the algorithm described in part (d). Show that its solution is $O(m + n\log m)$.

**a.** The "only if" part is trivial, it follows form the definition of Monge array.

As for the "if" part, let's first prove that

$$
\begin{aligned}
         A[i, j] + A[i + 1, j + 1] & \le A[i, j + 1] + A[i + 1, j] \\\\
\Rightarrow  A[i, j] + A[k, j + 1] & \le A[i, j + 1] + A[k, j],
\end{aligned}
$$

where $i < k$.

Let's prove it by induction. The base case of $k = i + 1$ is given. As for the inductive step, we assume it holds for $k = i + n$ and we want to prove it for $k + 1 = i + n + 1$. If we add the given to the assumption, we get

$$
\begin{aligned}
                                        A[i, j] + A[k, j + 1] & \le A[i, j + 1] + A[k, j]     & \text{(assumption)} \\\\
                                    A[k, j] + A[k + 1, j + 1] & \le A[k, j + 1] + A[k + 1, j] & \text{(given)} \\\\
\Rightarrow A[i, j] + A[k, j + 1] + A[k, j] + A[k + 1, j + 1] & \le A[i, j + 1] + A[k, j] + A[k, j + 1] + A[k + 1, j] \\\\
                        \Rightarrow A[i, j] + A[k + 1, j + 1] & \le A[i, j + 1] + A[k + 1, j]
\end{aligned}
$$

**b.**

$$
\begin{matrix}
37 & 23 & \mathbf{24} & 32 \\\\
21 &  6 &  7 & 10 \\\\
53 & 34 & 30 & 31 \\\\
32 & 13 &  9 & 6  \\\\
43 & 21 & 15 & 8  \\\\
\end{matrix}
$$

**c.** Let $a_i$ and $b_j$ be the leftmost minimal elements on rows $a$ and $b$ and let's assume that $i > j$. Then we have

$$A[j, a] + A[i, b] \le A[i, a] + A[j, b].$$

But

$$
\begin{aligned}
A[j, a] \ge A[i, a] & (a_i \text{ is minimal}) \\\\
A[i, b] \ge A[j, b] & (b_j \text{ is minimal}) \\\\
\end{aligned}
$$

Which implies that

$$
\begin{aligned}
A[j, a] + A[i, b] & \ge A[i, a] + A[j, b] \\\\
A[j, a] + A[i, b] & =   A[i, a] + A[j, b]
\end{aligned}
$$

Which in turn implies that either:

$$
\begin{aligned}
A[j, b] < A[i, b] & \Rightarrow A[i, a] > A[j, a] \Rightarrow a_i \text{ is not minimal} \\\\
A[j, b] = A[i, b] & \Rightarrow b_j \text{ is not the leftmost minimal}
\end{aligned}
$$

**d.** If $\mu_i$ is the index of the $i$-th row's leftmost minimum, then we have

$$\mu_{i - 1} \le \mu_i \le \mu_{i + 1}.$$

For $i = 2k + 1$, $k \ge 0$, finding $\mu_i$ takes $\mu_{i + 1} - \mu_{i - 1} + 1$ steps at most, since we only need to compare with those numbers. Thus

$$
\begin{aligned}
T(m, n) & = \sum_{i = 0}^{m / 2 - 1} (\mu_{2i + 2} - \mu_{2i} + 1) \\\\
        & = \sum_{i = 0}^{m / 2 - 1} \mu_{2i + 2} - \sum_{i = 0}^{m / 2 - 1}\mu_{2i} + m / 2 \\\\
        & = \sum_{i = 1}^{m / 2} \mu_{2i} - \sum_{i = 0}^{m / 2 - 1}\mu_{2i} + m / 2 \\\\ &= \mu_m - \mu_0 + m / 2 \\\\
        & = n + m / 2 \\\\
        & = O(m + n).
\end{aligned}
$$

**e.** The divide time is $O(1)$, the conquer part is $T(m / 2)$ and the merge part is $O(m + n)$. Thus,

$$
\begin{aligned}
T(m) & = T(m / 2) + cn + dm \\\\
     & = cn + dm + cn + dm / 2 + cn + dm / 4 + \cdots \\\\
     & = \sum_{i = 0}^{\lg m - 1}cn + \sum_{i = 0}^{\lg m - 1}\frac{dm}{2^i} \\\\
     & = cn\lg m + dm\sum_{i = 0}^{\lg m - 1} \\\\
     & < cn\lg m + 2dm \\\\
     & = O(n\lg m + m).
\end{aligned}
$$
